id
Plan
ltu 
achievement-
version
Planned 
release 
version
Status
State
Development proposal (original)
Development proposal (original)
Refinement of the development proposal
Development proposal clarification
Description of the development proposal
Development proposal
Lift-
date
Raised date
Proposer
Proposer
Size Class-
rating DH (1-3)
Ball park 
estimate for 
DH
Business manager
invitation (1-3)
Impact is 
market
Potential
nose 
of the product 
improvement
Product 
improvem
ent
Priority
i (1-3)
Priority
Reasons for the proposal
Arguments for proposal
Comment
Comment
Effects of the proposal
Impact of proposal
Implementation evaluated 
scope
Does it require 
measures 
commissioning 
in connection with
(Yes/No)
Requires 
actions in 
Commission
g (Y/N)
Processing 
roadmap
Next steps
Wrought 
in the development group
date
Presented in the 
development WG
Customer Committee/Wed
of the emergency working group 
progression recommendation
Recommendation from 
CC/DWG
x
x
x
A description of what the requested change is about.
in English
Because 
change
dotus is 
Where did the change proposal come from?
x
Why change is needed, what are they 
concrete effects, if 
the change would be omitted 
How does the change affect the current ones 
to specifications. 
How to promote the matter, 
e.g. is it enough? 
passage 
Because it matters 
processed e.g. process-
in the working group
Deciding on how 
with change 
let's move on, whether to do it or not 
3 2.0
Implemented
According to one of the cases in the UC.DDQ.REQ.ACP.ID 
test, we need to implement accounting point search using 
related accounting point identification (RAPI). As we 
understand the test, we should provide the DDQ an option 
that if an AP is found using regular address based search 
and if the AP has a related AP that did not appear in the 
original search, then the DDQ can find the related AP using 
RAPI. However, at the moment the search requires that 
both post office (city) and street name are present in the 
search keywords. I think the search would be much more 
useful, if it would allow searching by RAPI only. This way 
the DDQ can always retrieve an AP by knowing the 
address of the related AP. For instance, in some rare cases 
cases, the AP might be located on the edge of a county 
and the AP and related AP can have quite different 
addresses. If we always require some address information 
in the search, then in most cases it is easier for the DDQ to 
search by address only, since it must be more or less 
known anyway.
DH-131 transaction changed: The seller or a third party can also apply 
information about the place of use by entering the place of use ID in the search, if there is one
open.
Information to be reported: Address of the place of use, part of the address or place of use ID. 
Freely chosen
as search factors, you can also use meter number, type of place of use,
ID of the parallel access point or subtype of the access point.
16/10/2020 NetGroup Nordic
1
0
Change of user ID 
explanation to the process
No
4
Development conditions
creature
It has been recognized that all grid products are not 
possible to represent in the Datahub data model, especially 
complex ones - these could be e.g. products with different 
kinds of Peak power calculation rules. This is of course 
fine. However, grid product code is mandatory in the grid 
agreement confirmation event, DH-312. So, there will be 
products which are not represented in the Datahub, but 
they are referred to in the event. There are the 
requirements and validations on the event "The product 
reported for the agreement must be found in Datahub, be in 
effect when the agreement starts and Belong to the 
reporting market party.". How is this Supposed to be 
handled? Is it expected that some sort of dummy products, 
without any product components, should be established? 
Note that this doesn't seem to be possible currently, 
according to the cardinality in the Data Standard.
5/10/2020 Hansen 
3
2
0
3
We are waiting for decisions on the guidelines of the Smart Grid Working Group for the power tariff and the network tariff 
in relation to harmonisation, this will most likely have effects 
to the functionalities of the datahub. 
Change of product information 
maintenance processes
No
5 2.1?
Development conditions
creature
Is it possible to get Accounting point type / 
MeteringPointType (AG01=ConsumptionAG02=Production) 
(as optional) into E66 message? Now when importing as a 
supplier E66 messages we don't know from the message 
that is the data consumption or production.
14/10/2020 Hansen 
2
2x+0
2
As part of the definitions of energy communities, measurement data will be made 
changes, e.g. the calculated data intended as a basis for invoicing will come 
to own. 
Transmission of measurement data
No
6 1.0
Implemented
There are business customers who do not have a y ID, but 
at the moment it is not possible to give the party's own 
recognize non-bankruptcy customers. Bridge 
currently, e.g. certain consulates that do not have 
fiscal obligation for the y-identifier and road councils, 
from which e.g. the taxman is currently taking it away already 
granted y codes. There is no PRH for them either 
granting ycredentials. 
This is why a change is needed to allow it 
notification of business customers with ID types y-id and 
party's own ID. 
For business customers who do not have a social security number (e.g. certain consulates or road councils), 
notified by the customer
as an identifier, the party's own identifier, which is formed by the seller 
from the party ID (GLN ID) and
from the seller's customer ID.
1.6.2020 ET/Tieyhdistys from the road councils
Industry/data conversion 
consulates
0
The change is needed in order to datahub 
can be reported as a business customer 
with the party's own ID, 
in situations where the customer does not have y-
recognize and the customer is not 
estate. If no change 
to do, these customers cannot be notified 
contracts to datahub in data conversion 
and not datahub in contract processes 
after commissioning. 
Added to the validation rules 
option to report as well 
party's own ID. Change 
affect the data hub as well 
to market participants. 
Yes
Wrought 
process working group, 
internally in the project, 
system vendor clinic
ace. 
System Supplier Forum
from which brought forth 
the need for change 
for a change request which 
processed again 
in the process working group 
5 October 2020. This 
the change proposal is 
according to the decision. 
12.6.2020/Processes., 
19.8.2020/Processes., 
10.9./Administrative Clinic, 
5 October 2020 
process working group
7 1.0
Implemented
Change made to a place of use under construction 
for dealing with the effective date of contracts when 
the measurement date is not the same as the original one announced 
the effective date of the agreement
If a new sales contract is made for the place of use while it is still in the space 
"under construction", but delivery
it is not possible to start the contract on the indicated start date, the sales contract 
start date and
the actual Connection date will differ. In these situations 
of the distribution system operator
in the data hub, the connection notification indicated automatically changes the 
on the connection day
to correspond to the effective dates of the valid sales and network agreement 
connection date. Seller
receives a notification about the update of the usage location information and the connection and this 
notification
based on this, the seller must update the effective date to the connection date in their own 
in their system.
Datahub also updates the effective date of the network agreement, so 
the network company also ensures,
that the effective date of the online agreement is the same in your own system 
like the connection date.
Datahub does not notify the parties of the date of the agreements 
about the change. The parties
the update of the effective date should not be done in this situation 
no notification
nor to datahub. If the state of the place of use is changed, for example 
in repair situations, will
the point of use first updates from the "under construction" state to the "disconnected" state and connects 
only after that, if
no changes are wanted to the start dates of the contracts.
1.1.2020 From the process working group
0
The change is needed because the original 
the planned model causes companies 
manual steps and is for the customer 
confusing because the customer will 
send another confirmation of this new one 
due to the contract. There are situations 
estimated to be 100,000 – 150 annually 
000 pcs. The amount of manual work is 
massive.  
Datahub has already been implemented in the system 
according to the original specification 
functionality. To the system 
we have to build logic 
based on the connection notification 
contract to be made 
to a change in the effective date. 
The change also affects the industry, 
because the industry's systems are 
manage the changes so that these 
for contracts that the datahub has 
updated effective date 
based on the connection notification, source 
new update/same contract notice 
with a new date
No
The matter has been dealt with 
in the process working group 
and ET 
information exchange 
in the development group. 
Change request for CGI 
(CR-081)
The matter has been dealt with 
in the process working group 
initially already 
in December 2019, 
actual processing 
12 February 2020. Given 
ET information exchange 
to the development group 
to be processed and 
processed there on March 2, 2020
8
Development conditions
creature
 - Should it be possible to provide measurement data in the search 
date, and datahub would return the given in response 
information changed after the date?
Should it be possible to give a date in the measurement data request, and 
datahub would return ony all changed information after that date?
2020
3
2
0
2
In the search for measurement data, a search period is already given.
9
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
In the product information, VAT percentage management, VAT percentage 
to be changed otherwise than by announcing a new product
The change in the VAT percentage planned by the government and product events (DH-714 and DH-718) and the agreement 
update events (DH-321)
We have received a question from our customers about how possible the VAT planned by the government
percentage discount can be applied to products "The government is planning to act on citizens' electricity bills 
in order to lower it in the coming winter, and one option to consider is lowering the electricity VAT.".
The only problem seems to be that when the product is confirmed in Datahub, its VAT-procent can 
no more change, right? Is it possible to change this if the VAT sale comes? So could you? 
How about removing the validation from Datahub for a certain period of time? 
Or is this even a problem, will contract update events go through if the product's VAT
percent has been changed?
In the product information there is a VAT percentage. Updating the VAT 
percentage should be possible without notifying a new product.
The product structural information update (DH-717/DH-718) should have 
it is also possible to update the tax rate information of the product component. Tax rate information 
history must be preserved according to the moments of change (the moment the change takes effect) and 
appear simultaneously in the user interface.
It should be possible to update the product component's tax rate 
information in the update product structural data event (DH-717/DH-
718). Tax rate history must be available according to the occurrence of 
changes (Product Start of occurrence) and be visible at the same time on the 
user interface.
8/15/2022 CSUSE0026681
1
1
0
1 The Finnish government is planning a change 
to the tax rate and so that you don't have to 
to create a new product in datahub, should 
be able to update tax rate information.
Invoicing is not done in Datahub, so this change would not be big in that sense 
thing. And not necessarily a big change in the interface. 
10 2.0
Implemented
With the parallel usage location ID, the usage location ID 
search without address information (February 1, 2022 is part 2.0 
functionality)
DH-131 transaction changed: The seller or a third party can also apply 
information about the place of use by entering the place of use ID in the search, if there is one
open.
Information to be reported: Address of the place of use, part of the address or place of use ID. 
Freely chosen
as search factors, you can also use meter number, type of place of use,
ID of the parallel access point or subtype of the access point.
Marjut finds out if CGI had already been asked for an estimate on this.
At the same time, you could through the interface 
enables with the use location ID 
search for basic information on the place of use. 
11 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
processing of the parallel use site DH-331 and DH-351 
at events 
(currently the original DH-331-1 kp-
logo, 
should be the identifier of the place of use, which the seller has 
on sale)
In the events of termination and cancellation of the sales contract, a parallel message is sent 
to the seller of the place of use (DH-331-3 and DH-351-3). At the moment, the message will send its location 
identifier that the event concerns, but it should send the identifier of the parallel place of use (i.e. kp, which is 
on sale at the seller receiving the message). 
Addendum: Also in the DH-311 process, a message is sent to the seller of the parallel location of use (DH-311-4 
eviction notice), which includes the place of use to be processed in the event.
In the sales agreement end and cancellation of sales agreement end events, a 
notification is sent to the supplier of the related accounting point (DH-331-3 and 
DH-351-3). Currently, the accounting point ID of the main accounting point in 
the event is sent, but datahub should send the ID of the related accounting 
point (i.e. the accounting point for which the receiving supplier has an 
agreement).
Note: Also DH-311 sends a notification (DH-311-4) to the supplier of the 
related accounting point with the main accounting point ID. 
DH-311-4, DH-331-3 and DH-351-3 messages are changed so that they 
the ID of the parallel access location is sent (kp, which is on the recipient 
on sale by the seller), and does not recognize the original place of use of the transaction. 
Or is it necessary to send both?
Change the DH-311-4, DH-331-3 and DH-351-3 Notifications so that the 
related accounting point id (for which the receiving supplier has an 
agreement) is sent instead of sending the original accounting point id. 
Or should both be sent?
From here 
several 
tickets 
before 
introduction
a
CHGUSE0000031373
2
1
0
1 The CMS system is fully functional 
illogically
This is more of an error in the original definition, which should be corrected. 
Note If there is a need to send 
the ID of both places of use, is 
change greater/with change 
effect on the structure of the messages. 
12 2.1?
Development conditions
creature
few improvement suggestions for the Search Business 
Messages functionality in the Datahub GUI.
The "Channel" filter could be a dropdown menu instead of 
a string input in the filtering for better usability. The same 
applies to the "Message type" filter.
1
0x
2 Usability improvement
13
Development conditions
creature
A filter for event type (corresponding to the "Transaction 
Type" in the message details, e.g. "DH-311-1") would be 
very useful, crucial even, since using the "Message type" 
filter is quite cumbersome to use due to the one to many 
relationships between message types and event types (one 
message type is used for many event types), and thus, 
doesn't provide detailed enough filtering.
1
0x
2 Usability improvement
14 2.1
Development conditions
creature
It would also be very useful to have some representation of 
the corresponding outbound ACC message inthe message 
details for inbound messages. Now the user has to go back 
and Forth between the message details and the search 
result.
1
0x
2 Usability improvement
15 2.0 p/2.1 
p?
Development conditions
creature
party identification to the response of the DH-72X request
1
1
0
2 Usability improvement - effect 
to the interface of the parties
16 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
To the seller in the acknowledgment of the cancellation of the sales contract 
information on whether the sales contract remained in force and until what date 
until. Now you have to go to the user interface to look 
that you will definitely find out the situation.
When the seller retroactively cancels the sales contract, the sales contract remains in certain situations 
in force for some time. At the moment, the seller is not notified about the situation after the cancellation, but 
the seller can only find out the situation by checking the datahub.
When a supplier cancels a sales agreement retrospectively, there are situations 
in which the sales agreement remains valid for a certain period of time. 
Currently, the supplier is not notified of the situation after the cancellation, and 
the supplier needs to check it in datahub.
Notification of the situation after the cancellation by e-mail, if the contract remains 
into effect/not canceled completely. And if it remains in effect, information about it 
from the date until which remains in force.
An email about the situation after the cancellation, only if agreed 
remains valid/is not fully cancelled. And if the agreement remains valid, then 
also information about the date until it is valid to.
4/3/2021
2
1
0
1 Usability improvement
Impact on the interface between the parties. 
Email notification if 
the end date changes 
to the refundable contract. 
17 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
For online contract confirmation, check that sales and 
the network contract is with the same customer. Currently 
there is no customer in the online contract confirmation. This 
does not prevent the situation of the network concluding a network contract 
for a different customer. You can have your own system online 
another customer what in the hub. That is, it is completely online 
responsible for making sure that the contract goes to that customer 
which is reported in the DH-311-2 message. 
A new validation is needed to check that the grid and sales agreements are for the 
same customer when confirming the grid contract. At the moment, there is no 
customer in the grid agreement confirmation request. This means that a DSO 
could make the grid agreement for another customer. DSO can have a 
customer in their own system that is different from the one in datahub. 
Currently, this means that it is the DSO's responsibility to make sure that the 
agreement is made for the customer that was notified in the DH-311-2 
message.
Information about the customer is added to the online contract confirmation message (DH-312-1). 
(e.g. customer ID), on the basis of which datahub checks that the customer 
corresponds to the customer of the sales contract.
Information about the customer (e.g. customer identification) is added to 
the grid agreement confirmation request (DH-312-1), and datahub 
validates the information to make sure the customer matches the 
customer of the sales agreement.
29/3/2021
2
1
0
1 Ensuring the quality of information.
Impact on the network company's interface. 
Confirmation of the online contract is required 
change so that Customer Data is a part 
notification. 
18 2.0 p/2.1 
p?
Development conditions
creature
The report does not show the number of places of use 
location IDs. 
Is it possible to get them displayed? If the PowerBI
can't get to the report so is it possible to add 
search criteria for control reports?
MP: Accounting Point Report to be with AP ID:
Accounting Point report doesn't have the Accounting Point IDs (but number of 
Accounting Points).   
In case the PowerBI report wouldn't have that information, then the option 
could be to have it with control reports as search criteria
30/3/2021 CHGUSE0000031374
1
0
0
2 Usability improvement
It would be possible to find out if it is possible to get the IDs in the report. 
19 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
Did we have guidelines when the DSO should update the 
estimated annual consumption when a new sale 
agreement is created? 
If we don't have those yet, would it be possible to write 
those so that the DSO needs to update the EYC after the 
has the new sales agreement become valid? Reasoning is that 
then the new supplier would get the updated information. 
If the SAO updates the EYC when a new sales agreement 
is forwarded, the new supplier does not get the new one 
EYC in DH-122-2 or DH-122-4. 
Building a scheduled DH-132 for the new supplier seems 
counter intuitive since the data could as well be forwarded to 
the new supplier. It also causes unnecessary messages if 
the new supplier starts to query the updated ACP data 
every day until the new sales agreement is valid.
If the distribution system operator announces an update of the annual usage estimate when 
a new contract is coming to the place of use, datahub should forward a new one 
annual usage estimate also for a new seller. The update should be announced, for example 
a new agreements is not yet valid at the time of updating the annual usage estimate, but 
datahub already has information about the future seller.
In case a distribution system operator notifies an estimated yearly 
consumption update for an accounting point with a future agreement 
(not yet valid at the time of the update), datahub should notify the new 
estimated annual consumption also to the new/future supplier. 
23/04/2021
2
1
0
1 The change would be a big change in principle 
in the datahub if the notification is about the place of use 
of the change would be sent to a new one 
to the seller before the valid one 
agreement. And on the other hand, the change of JVH 
in processes would be big if wanted 
notice to datahub only 
after the commencement of the sales contract. 
Is used in all processes 
the principle that there is a right to information only 
for the duration of the agreement. Here 
so we would make an exception to that 
to the general principle that is in time 
also reviewed with TEM. 
Reasonable need for change in more detail.
Let's see if there is a need to start thinking about some detour, e.g. 
e-mail to the seller when the information has been updated. 
20 2.0 p/2.1 
p?
Development conditions
creature
The hope that in the search results of sales contracts (search sales 
agreement results) would show the end date of the agreement. 
But it would be nice to have a stop date and reason in the Search Sales line, so 
one don't have to open the specific sales agreement for a quick check. But 
that's probably for later developments. Just a quick wish.
8 June 2021
1
0
0
2 Usability improvement
21 2.2?
Development conditions
creature
For example, the billing address does not appear on the form 
highlighted/starred mandatory fields even if there are some. 
These will only appear when there is data to be sent. 
Mandatory information is also missing when filling out customer information 
accents e.g. name and contact information. There was too 
discussion that it would be great if the form had 
functionality, that it could highlight the mandatory ones 
fields that are generated according to what the user selects 
a certain type of customer.
The mandatory fields are not highlighted or marked with stars e.g. in the 
invoicing address form even there is some mandatory field to be filled in. User 
get notification about missing fields when trying to submit the form. In the 
customer data fill is also missing the required mandatory fields, e.g. name and 
contact information. The form could also dynamically highlight the mandatory fields 
that are necessary and and generated by user selection like when selecting 
customer type.
15.6.2021
1
0x
2 Would clarify which are mandatory 
fields and would improve usability. 
The change wouldn't necessarily be big because 
could be drawn into fields that are 
mandatory
Usability improvement
22 2.1
Development conditions
creature
Datahub in the user interface would be good if the user with it 
the organization you currently represent would be visible on the home page right away 
and not just by clicking on user information
It would be useful to present the logged in person's organization in the datahub 
UI right in the front page, not after clicking the user information.
16/06/2021
1
0x
2 The parties sometimes represent several 
organization and daily work 
to make it easier, it would be good if there was information 
immediately visible
Usability improvement
23
Development conditions
creature
The message tracking form would need a GSRN ID 
for the selection criterion. Or as a worse option 
The GSRN ID could be displayed in the newsletter.
It would also be easier if it were possible to search for the location in question in the network usage location information 
messages from the time point defined by the selection criteria
There is a need in the follow-up form for messages to be able to pick-up the 
GSRN id. Or in Worse alternative GSRN id could be shown in message follow-
up list.
It would be usefull if in the grid's accounting point data there were possibility to 
retrieve the messages of the accounting point with a limited moment of time 
seach criteria 
16/06/2021
2
0
0
2 Tracking messages would be easier when 
can be applied for with the GSRN code 
among messages
24 2.1?
Development conditions
creature
It would also be easier if the information on the location of the network is used 
it would be possible to search for the messages of that user location 
from the point in time defined by the selection criteria
It would be useful if it would be possible to search all messages related to 
selected accounting point as seach criteria for limited time period in the DSO's 
accounting point information.
16/06/2021
1
0x
2 The place of use could be viewed 
messages faster
25 1.8.1.1
Implemented
Search for business messages functionality is good that it can 
track the number of messages and what types of messages there are 
wrought. We are a little sad when they are not there 
received in quantities in such a way that one could even count 
by message type, how much of what has been processed. Or 
the functionality "export.csv" is missing. There yesterday when 
I looked into that interface a little more, yes 
I noticed that the button can be found there, when 
we are very precise.
You can find the button when you zoom in close enough 
to the right side of the search results, so you can notice,that 
a faint line appears on the user interface. That's when it works 
to click, and the buttons will also open, like in the others 
there is a way in the search results and this is also how you get the search information 
exported to a csv file for further analysis. Here would be 
maybe good to check with the system supplier that 
how to make that button more visible because 
I believe that the other parties also have that characteristic 
might dig. Attached are the pictures, one of which is shown 
a line that must be clicked to find the button.
With the 'Search Business Messages' it is possible to follow the number of 
messages and what kind of messages have been sent and received. There is no 
functionality to calculate per message type the number of messages. The 
functionality to export the messages to a csv file is not available. When looking 
the screen carefully the option to export the list of business messages to a csv 
file is there, but it is difficult to find.
When the 'Search Results' is panned to the right, a pale appears to the right 
line. When this line is successfully clicked, a menu with option to export the 
search results to a csv file appears. The csv file can be used for analysis.
The button to open the menu should be made better visible as this is a 
functionality that is needed by market parties.
It is now clearer in the upper right corner of the business messages search list 
find a push button with three dots. This will open the related to the list 
a menu with e.g. possibility to import the contents of the list in CSV format.
'Search for business messages' on the screen the layout of the menu is unified 
with other screens.
The top right corner of the result set of business message search list is 
now more easily findable button with three dots. This opens a menu with 
option to export the result set to a csv file.
In the screen 'Search Business Messages' the layout of the menu button 
is unified with the other screens.
17.6.2021
0
1 Finding that button is 
awkward. By changing the button 
stylization would result in a button 
more visible and easier 
to be found.
The styling of that button 
editing is not a major change.
26 2.1?
Development conditions
creature
Development ideas for the 'List Open Transactions' page:
1. It would be good if the created timestamp would appear except 
the date as well as the time. This is how you can go through 
open events in order. 
2. It would be good if the view could be drawn to the entire screen 
to size. So you would see more events 
at a time. 
3. It would be good if you read how many events there are.
4. It would be good if you clicked on a row so that it would appear in the others 
color rather than gray. Now it is very difficult to see where 
has been clicked when all are greyed out. Differences in shades of gray 
are not visible enough.
Could the CMS list view in the picture be enlarged to full screen size? When there are events 
a lot, it is difficult to get an idea of ​​the whole mass when only a few lines are visible at a time.
Development ideas to the 'List Open Transactions' page:
1. Create time stamp could present also time besides the date. Sorting of open 
events in time order.
2. It should be possible to maximize the whole view full screen size. More 
events at one screen.
3. The number of events presented.
4. The selected row could be visualized with a different color than gray. That 
would help the see where the selection is at the moment. It is difficult to see 
differences in the hues of gray.
17/06/2021 CSUSE0014749
1
0x
2 The changes in question would improve 'List 
Usability of the Open Transactions' page
27
Development conditions
creature
The right of the registrant to limit their data according to the GDPR 
processing.
According to the Data Protection Regulation (art. 18), the data subject has 
in certain situations, the right to the data controller 
restrict processing. Compliant with data protection regulations 
restriction of processing means that data can 
still store, but for other processing (such as e.g. 
to disclose information), must have a special Data Protection
the basis laid down in the decree (e.g. the registered 
consent, processing of the rights of another party 
for protection).  In relation to Datahub, as the only Data Protection
in accordance with the regulation regarding the restriction of processing 
the fact that the data subject denies may come into question as a basis 
accuracy of personal data. Privacy policy 
according to the processing must then be limited until 
the data controller has been able to verify the data 
accuracy.
According to the GDPR registered has rights to limit the handling of her/his 
data.
According to the data privacy art 18 registered has in certain situations right 
that Registry owner limits handling of data. That means that those data can be 
still stored in the datahub, but for other handling (like e.g. abandonment of data) 
shall require a specific justification as legislated in data privacy art (like 
registered approval, handling data to protect other person's rights). In datahub 
case the only handling limitation justification, according to the data privacy art, 
could be that registered denies the correctness of personal data. According to 
the data privacy art, the handling of data shall be stopped until the Registry 
owner has been able to make sure that the personal data is correct.
21.6.2021
2
1
0
2 Legality
Has a wider impact on the industry, and 
to plan how this 
limiting is implemented in the hub, and 
does it affect anything 
to market processes. And will it 
limitation notified to the party 
extend to the Hub?
28
Double (20)
Should appear in the search results of the CMS Contract Search 
contract termination date and reason for termination, if applicable 
the end has been announced
28/06/2021 Ticket CSUSE0005744
Usability improvement
This way, it would not be necessary to open it 
contract itself to see the information.
29
Double (19)
About the update of usage location data and the annual usage estimate 
the update should be reported to the new seller of the place of use
28/06/2021 Ticket CSUSE0005785
Usability improvement
A principled decision about it 
can it be from the usage location information 
inform the future seller in advance. 
It is currently agreed that 
the seller receives information about the location of use 
notification if there is a change 
during the contract period. 
30 2.0 p/2.1 
p?
Development conditions
creature
The connection status of the place of use should be updated in the CMS 
in real time. The connection is reported with an hourly accuracy, 
so if today there is a connection notification for this day, it should 
after the status is updated to the CMS at the same time. 
Switching state for metering point shall be updated real time into CMS. Switch 
time is given in one hour accuracy, thus if today comes a new switch notification 
for today, the state shall be updated right away into CMS.
28/06/2021 Ticket CSUSE0006062
2
0
0
2 Usability improvement
There may be a bigger change to the CMS operating logic. 
Confusing in the industry that this 
the connection of the day is shown 
in the user interface only tomorrow 
with the view date of the day. 
31 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
An update or update request for customer data will be rejected if 
the update includes both the post office box and the street address. 
Now it's in the rules that one of them has to report, 
but it is not prevented that you can declare both. 
Validations needed for customer addresses and postal invoicing addresses
At the moment we don't have validations for customer addresses or customers 
postal invoicing addresses that there should be only either street address or 
PO Box.
So we would need new validations to check that if a street address is given 
then the PO Box is not allowed and vice versa.
We also need to add a validation that if a building number is given then street 
name is required. I don't know whether this one issue we had was related to 
this that the PO box was given then it was possible to add the building number 
as well.
MP: Customer data update (just PO Box or Street Address)
Currently rule force that one of those items need to be updated, but it's not 
prohibited to update both of them
Origin: Market Party wish list -selected in January 2022
A validation is added to Datahub, according to which the update of customer data is rejected 
(DH-111) or update request (DH-112, DH-113), if the update includes both 
PO box and street address.
A new validation rule is needed to reject the update of the customer 
information (DH-111) or request of update (DH-112, DH-113) if the 
update contains both a PO box and a street address.
28/06/2021 Ticket CSUSE0006144
CHGUSE0000031236
CHGUSE0000031375
1
0
0
1 Usability improvement and knowledge of information 
quality maintenance.
Without a rule, a party can notify 
both, the zip code is however 
only once and a mailbox 
the postal code differs from the street address 
from the postal code. Quality of information 
will deteriorate if not changed.
32
Development conditions
creature
Annual usage estimate and time zone information mutual 
validation
29/06/2021
2
1
0
3 Usability improvement
Currently allows two 
annual usage estimate even given 
the time zone is simultaneous. It would come 
be a validation that if a one-time measurement 
should not be given as time zone 
one annual usage estimate
33
Preliminary investigation 
CGI
Notifying the same of the termination of the agreement 
for the end date, when the contract is already in the data hub 
ended should be possible. 
It should be possible to make notification of contract ending on the same date when 
contract has already ended in the data hub.
29/06/2021
3
1 x
2 Usability improvement
Causes an unnecessary error message 
to the sending party when the contract 
has already ended for the same day. 
34
Development conditions
creature
We would need a report on everything from our side 
regarding message traffic. Is it possible for you? 
deliver one that shows the reason code, place of use and 
all the other information that comes out of the message? The one in CMS 
The business news report does not quite cover our needs. 
Our purpose would be to investigate cases of errors in TUKO2 
after the decision.
It should be possible to get a report out of all events/messages for our market 
party. Report shall include the following data: reason code, metering point id and 
other message information. CMS Busness events report does not cover this 
kind of needs. Report is needed when analyzing error cases.
21.9.2021
2
0x/0
2 Usability improvement
Search business messages are not 
sufficient
35 1.9.0 p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
Customer has a fixed term contract until 13 September 2022. However, 
move-out was created for 30.9.2021. After the move-out being 
accepted by Datahub, customer informs a new invoicing 
address. We update it to our system and that generates DH-321-
1. However, DH-321-1 is rejected by Datahub due to "Attribute 
'Fixed Term End Date' must be the same as or earlier than '2021-09-
30T21:00:00Z'.". As we are not trying to make any changes to 
the fixed term end date (same date is in the DH-321-1 as is 
already in the customer contract in Datahub), why is the 
message rejected? Is there a reason why Datahub is concerned 
about the fixed term end date when the contract is ending anyway 
(and ending was successful even though fixed term and date is 
after the end date)? Could we expect changes coming to the 
rules here in the near future?
In cases of move-out getting cancelled, it would be better that the 
fixed term end date is the "original" one.
The customer has had a fixed-term contract valid until September 13, 2022, but the customer's move out has been announced 
for 30 September 2021 to Datahub (= termination of the contract). After announcing the move out, the customer has announced 
their new billing address, which has been attempted to update the contract to Datahub with DH-321-1, but Datahub rejects 
with the reason for the notification "Attribute 'Fixed Term End Date' must be same as or earlier than '2021-09-30T21:00:00Z'", i.e. 
Datahub does not accept that the update message contains a deadline later than the end date of the contract 
term.  
In this case, DH-321-1 did not attempt to update/change the expiration date by contract 
From the date already in Datahub, but the information (end date) is always included in the contract 
in the update message when it is a fixed-term contract.
In this case, you would also not want to change the end date of the deadline, so that the original date 
is kept in case of a possible cancellation of the move out. 
Customer had a fixed term contract valid until 13.9.2022, but a move-out was reported 
to Datahub for 30.9.2021 (= contract end). After the move-out was reported, the 
customer notified the supplier of a new invoicing address which the supplier tried to 
update to Datahub using DH-321. Datahub rejected the DH-321 due to validation rule 
"Attribute 'Fixed Term End Date' must be same as or earlier than '2021-09-
30T21:00:00Z' (i.e. Datahub does not accept an agreement update where the fixed end 
date is later than the agreement end date).
In this case, DH-321 did not contain an update to the fixed term dates (dates were the 
same as already in Datahub) but the dates are always included in the update request 
(if the agreement is fixed term).
In this case, the supplier would not want to change the fixed term end date in order to 
keep the original end date in case the move-out (agreement end) gets cancelled.
Validation related to deadlines should be done in DH-321 
only if changes are made to the deadlines/dates. If DH-
The deadline information (dates) of the 321-1 message is already answered by Datahub 
found values, validation is not done for dates. Such a condition already exists 
implemented for rule VR.AGR.051.202U, but also needed for rules 
VR.AGR.052.225 and VR.AGD.051.222.
Fixed term date validation rules should only be used if the fixed term 
information/dates are actually updated, i.e. no validation done on the 
fixed term dates in DH-321 if the fixed term dates in the request are the 
same as already in the database. A condition for this has already been 
implemented for VR.AGR.051.202U, but it is also needed for rules 
VR.AGR.052.225 and VR.AGD.051.222.
23/09/2021 CSUSE0007038
1
0
0
1 The contract update will not go through unless 
party also update at the same time 
expiration date of the term 
for the end date of the contract. 
Both in current and DH2.0 
there is a validation rule in the spec:
• VR.AGR.052.225: The new fixed 
term end date must be the same as or 
earlier than the Agreement end date.
That contract update crashes here. 
In other words, the hub works according to the specs. 
So a spec change is needed
36 2.0 p/2.1 
p?
Development conditions
creature
According to the notification of the e-invoice address, also the customer's 
bank. 
E-invoice notification could also include end customer bank.
5 October 2021
1
1
0
2 The customer's e-invoice without bank information 
billing channel information is useless. 
Can this information be considered? 
to bring along. 
37 2.0 p/2.1 
p?
Development conditions
creature
You can't directly from the message sent by datahub 
to conclude, for example, the termination notice DH-422 
on whether the cut was made by the seller 
on the basis of a disconnection request or for the network's own reasons. 
The ID field of the original message always has a chain 
identifier of the previous message (e.g. in DH-422-2 DH-422-
1's code), in which case nocan conclude anything about it. If 
the DH-421-1 sent by the seller would be used instead 
the message identifier, the seller would see from this that it is 
answer to their request (but may confuse 
processing of datahub's composite processes). Same situation 
applies to all events that a party can send either 
on its own initiative or in response to another party 
to request (DH-111, DH-122, DH-412, DH-422).
It cannot be directly concluded from the message e.g. in the switch off 
notification DH-422 if the switch off is done by supplier based on the switch off 
request or from DSO's own reasons. Original message id field always has the 
previous messages's id in the chain (e.g. DH-422-2 has DH-422-1 id), thus 
there cannot be any conclusion. If it would be used instead of the DH-421-1 
message id sent by supplier, supplier would see that there is a response to them 
request (but this might disturb the composite process handling). Same situation 
concern also all events that party can send either by own request or as 
response to the other party's request (DH-111, DH-122, DH-412, DH-422).
7/10/2021 Ticket CSUSE0007017
1
1
0
2 Can't be done in the seller's system 
to conclude whether the interruption is caused by the network 
interruption or response to done 
to disconnection request. This information is needed, 
in order to be able to assess whether it can be obtained 
later the place of use connected when 
own receivables have been collected from the customer.
38
Development conditions
creature
Validation of invoice data by contract, that 
on the opposite side is information about through billing. 
20/10/2021 Ticket CSUSE0007675
2
0
0
3 Account line information is accepted, for example 
contracts have different information. Currently 
the description is that the party answers 
from the reported information that goes to the right 
to the recipient. 
Consider how it affects 
to performance if all count lines 
validated by contract. 
39
Preliminary investigation 
(law)
A development idea for the future of consumer authorizations 
to enhance collection.. Could the current portal 
to "detach" the granting of authorization 
As a Datahub service and website that could be connected 
to the online services of the parties? In this case, the consumer would give 
authorization GDPR from the point of view of the right party 
in the service (Datahub) and authorization could be granted 
relate to the situation where the authorization actually 
is required (the party's web service). Practically 
the authorization service could be the same from the user's point of view 
in the style of "pass-through service" like, for example, the current ones 
identification services or payment services where the user 
moves from a website to another party's service and back 
back after completing the necessary action. Like 
or similar service is actually a prerequisite that 
the Datahub possibilities "behind" the authorization 
can be utilized in the consumer segment. From what 
development idea sounds like?
11/3/2021 CSUSE0007907
3
1
0
3 A discussion is also required regarding the legal 
with data protection people, not necessarily 
straightforward
Justifications from a legal point of view are needed.
No
40 2.0 p/2.1 
p?
Development conditions
creature
The as/as to be used in the account of the place of use. 
should return both options even if given 
to the address of only one of these. 
Search should return Metering point id for both "as" and "as." in case one of 
those are given into the search.
23/11/2021
1
0
0
2 The ID applicant does not know which one 
in a way the information is by the network 
saved
A new validation rule is needed 
over here. 
No
41 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
If the seller terminates or cancels the sales contract before 
as the network has had time to confirm its own equivalent 
network agreement, no information is transmitted to the network 
termination or cancellation of the sales contract. 
It might be a good idea to pass on the unconfirmed one as well 
based on the online agreement.
DSO to receive info of SAG (sales agreement) end or cancellation:
In case DDQ ends or cancels a SAG before DSO has confirmed their GAG (grid 
agreement), DSO doesn't receive information about the SAG end or 
cancellation. It would be good to notify the DSO also when GAG is not yet 
confirmed.
Origin: Market Party wish list -selected in January 2022
Currently processes DH-331 and DH-341 pass the information 
on terminating or canceling the sales contract only, if similar 
the online contract has been confirmed. Let's change the processes so that the mediation 
also happens to an unconfirmed online contract.
Note DH-331 starts the process chain confirmed network contract 
to decide if the sales contract ends with moving out. Unconfirmed 
in the case of an online contract, only information is transmitted 
from the end of the sales contract (the process chain is not started). 
Currently, the DH-331 and DH-341 processes send a notification to the 
DSO only if the corresponding grid agreement is confirmed. The 
processes will be changed so that a notification is sent also if the grid 
agreement is unconfirmed. 
Note: DH-331 starts a composite process for ending the corresponding 
grid agreement if the sales agreement ends due to a move-out. In case 
of an unconfirmed grid agreement, only a notification is sent (a 
composite process is not started). 
23/11/2021 CHGUSE0000031376
1
1
0
1 The network would be notified if the seller immediately cancels 
or terminate the contract.
No
42 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature
The update of customer data should be checked, not in the data hub 
save unnecessary characters in the customer's name. 
For example, a single-party system message converter 
changed the text as follows: Jämsänkoski Metsästysyhdistys 
ry. 
Let's go through which characters should be allowed and which could be blocked. 
Note Is it necessary to think about generally still allowed characters (other than just customer data 
under)?
Customer data characters to be verified:
With Customer data update there should be verified that there aren't useless 
characters with customer's name to be updated to Datahub. 
E.g. "Jämsänkoski Metsästysyhdistys ry. " characters shouldn't be 
allowed
Origin: Market Party wish list -selected in January 2022
Events DH-111, DH-112, DH-113 and DH-311 to be added to Datahub 
message validation to prevent the following characters from being reported. This 
validation is done using the Regex method.
24/11/2021 CHGUSE0000031377
1
1
0
1 The quality of customer information can be maintained 
preferred.
The quality of customer information can be maintained 
preferred.
43
Development conditions
creature
Development proposal for further development: When the seller updates 
contract information, e.g. billing address, should be DH-321-1 
to the message also add the beginning of the deadline and 
term. The seller came up with a development proposal that 
these days would not need to be announced, as they are put in the message 
the dates may not match the existing ones 
to the contract and have no effect on anything. Example 
a case where a fixed-term contract started already in 2014 and 
as the starting date of the fixed-term contract DH-321-1 
you can put a date up to 3.5 years back in the message.
When supplier updates contract information e.g. invoice address, shall the DH-
321-1 messages also have fixed term start and end dates. The supplier had 
development proposal that it would not be necessary to inform those dates 
because the dates in the message do not necessarily match with existing ones 
contract and those have no impact on anything. E.g. case where fixed term 
contract has already started from year 2014 and fixed term contract start date in 
the DH-321-1 message can have a maximum of 3.5 years retrospective date.
30/11/2021 Ticket CSUSE0008779
2
1
0
2
No
44
Development conditions
creature
Development proposal: In the DH-342 event description, the rule: 
The online contract cancellation information is forwarded to the seller, 
which has at the place of use
sales contract valid at the time of cancellation. 
It would be good if you checked that the equivalent of the online agreement 
the sales contract has been canceled so then this would not be notified 
to the reinstated seller. Especially if it's different 
of the customer's contract.
DH-342 event description has the following rule: Grid contract termination 
information will be forwarded to the supplier that has a valid sales contract on the 
accounting point at the time the termination is valid. It would be a good system 
would validate if sales contract corresponds to grid contract has been 
terminated, and it would inform the for the supplier that became valid again. 
Especially if there is a different customer's contract in that case.
26/11/2021 Ticket CSUSE0008783
2
0
0
2
45 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
Updates to the contract information have been received, which have been announced 
e-mail invoice address, even if the contract 
the billing channel is something else. 
Titta was not allowed to provide the e-mail invoice address, 
if the billing channel is something other than email. 
However, Datahub accepted these. 
That is, preventive validation should be done in this respect. 
Email invoice to be updateable only if the correct Invoice channel chosen:
Market party has received updates to agreements with invoicing email address, 
although agreement invoice channel is not email address.
A validation rule is added to the DH-310 and DH-320 processes: 
If the billing channel indicated is not "E-mail" or "Mobile billing", no 
"Other electronic billing address" information may be reported. 
Add a new validation rule to the DH-310 and DH-320 processes:
If the invoicing channel of the submitted Sales Agreement is not "E-mail" 
or "Mobile invoice", then "Other invoicing address" is not allowed.
30/11/2021 Ticket CSUSE0008919
CHGUSE0000031378
1
1
0
1 Data quality maintenance.
Data quality maintenance.
46
Development conditions
creature
 "We are left with many cases where 
the place of use of the electricity usage object has not been found since 
the network company or we have the wrong postal code in their information. 
We suggest that you could also do the search without it 
postal code by placing an asterisk (*) in the search. For example 
if the address is Examplekatu 7 C 44, 02210 ESPOO then 
the search could also be made in mudo Eksimirkatu 7 C 44, 
* ESPOO. However, if the other information is correct at the address 
except for the postal code, so it is most likely that the search 
produces the correct address. This would benefit from our opinion 
sellparties and distribution network operators. Also Ediel.fi 
the service works in a similar way to the location search 
in service."
We have a lot of cases where metering point cannot be found because DSO or 
supplier has incorrect postal code in the address. We propose the possibility to 
make search without postal code by giving Asterix (*) into search.
3/12/2021 Ticket CSUSE0009058
1
0x
3
47
Development conditions
creature
There should be funny texts in the AdditionalCode fields 
add validation so that, for example, "Building" does not 
would be accepted in a future version.
2.12.2021 Ticket CSUSE0009021 
1
1
0
3
48 1.9.0
Implemented
The user interface is used to sort numerical fields 
as a string. Therefore, the result of sorting is 
for example the sequence "1, 121, 13, 2,...' 
The user interface sorts the numeric fields as strings. For that reason 
example the sorting done in order "1, 121, 13, 2,..."
Data in numeric fields is arranged numerically and not as a string.
The numeric fields are sorted as numbers, not as strings.
3/2/2022 Ticket CSUSE0008395
Improves the user interface 
functionality
49 2.0 p or 
2.1
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
In Datainterface, the URI of requests uses person or Y
acknowledge. Because the URIs of the queries are logged, they remain in the logs 
information that shouldn't be there.
Data interface is using person id or company id for requests. Those URLs 
requests are logged into the log file and that shall not happen.
Example:
https://dh-fingrid-sat01-
b2b.azurewebsites.net/rest/FGR/DIFGetCustomerData?organisationUser=B2B
CGdso1AAdmin&TenantCode=FGR&customerIdentification=DDMMYY-1234
See https://stackoverflow.com/questions/39568719/rest-api-get-with-sensitive-
data
This is a data privacy issue.
Let's change the data interface to use the POST method instead of the GET method, 
in which case the registration of personal ID and company ID in the log text is not 
happen. POST and GET methods should be supported at the same time (e.g. 3 
months) after the implementation of this change.
Change the data interface to use the POST method instead of GET 
(then the personal id and company id logging does not occur). The 
POST and GET methods should be supported at the same time (e.g. 3 
months) after commissioning of this change.
3/2/2022 Ticket CSUSE0003905
0
1 x
1 Improves information security.
System suppliers have to 
to implement support for the new 
for the interface call method. It can be done 
if necessary, build a temporary support 
for both methods and e.g. 3 months 
after that, the old method is removed 
of use.
50
Development conditions
creature
Case: The place of use was without a vendor and disconnected. 
The seller notifies the new sales contract in datahub. Here 
in connection, the seller clarified the status of the place of use (disconnected). 
Later, the network reports the connection retroactively, 
the connection date is the day before the start date of the contract -
> the seller does not receive information about the connection, because the information is forwarded 
only for the current seller of the place of use. From here 
ticket, is there a problem that should be taken on a certain schedule 
to the development list or can you come up with some instructions for which seller 
cope with the situation?
Deletion of the connection information of the connection process:
katve in the transmission of connection information to be removed => for further development of connection processes.
Now, in this situation, you should search for the location/customer information with a DH-132 message, so that the information 
the connection would be up to you.
(E.g. Hi, 
KP XXXXXXXXXXXX. We have started the contract as a move-in on 14.9.21. We can still see the target 
truncated, for by that knowledge it is confirmed to us. We asked the network for connection information and they said, 
that it has been delivered to Datahub and the status of the item in Datahub is "connected". As far as we are concerned, this information is not yet available 
came 
I hope you find a fix for this quickly, because otherwise our reports and system will produce 
incorrect data and above all our data is not consistent with Datahub. Our contract 
has started as a move-in, but the object is still disconnected
Accounting point has been without supplier and switched off. Supplier notifications 
new sales contract into datahub. The supplier has found out the status of the 
accounting point (switched off). Later DSO informs retrospective switch on, the 
switch on date is previous day of the contract start date -> supplier does not get 
information about switch is, because the information is disclosed only to the 
current supplier of the accounting point. 
4/2/2022 Ticket CSUSE0007163
1
1
2 It would make it easier for the seller if I could get the information. 
Can the processing be changed so that if 
that location update will be announced 
after the entry into force of the agreement 
(even if Change Day itself is 
for an earlier day) so the seller would get 
information. 
A decision in principle to whom the information about the update of the location of use goes
51
FG 
document
The FD.CMD.AVR document has been issued to market participants 
stylized. B2B is described in that document 
error codes returned by the interface.
The user interface should be added to the document 
validations, alreadytka is depicted in FD.CMD.ADC 
in the document.
There is also a separate document about measurement data errors. 
It would be good to add the errors in this document as well 
to the document.
4 February 2022
The market can be documented 
validations for which there is no documentation 
currently available.
52
Development conditions
creature
At the request of the system supplier, I put a development request 
regarding the customer's address and the contract 
to the language issue of the billing address.
Now our system works in such a way that customer data 
the update goes through automatically in the system (seller 
master). With the current model, we have customers' addresses 
confused in terms of language, if we have any 
with the online customer, the service language is Swedish and the seller sends 
address in Finnish. There's no way you can do this 
to monitor/correct.
According to the system supplier, if the addresses were used 
language included, they could make a comparison and so on 
would catch these cases and make the necessary corrections 
done.
As a development, we hope to include a language code according to the customer 
regarding addresses and messages that contain addresses 
(postal address, billing address).
Now the datahub works so that end customer update accepted automatically in 
the system (supplier master). In the current model end customer address can 
go mess because of language in case there is grid customer has service 
language in Swedish and supplier delivers address in Finnish. This cannot be 
controlled or fixed. According to the system vendor, in case there were 
language information in the address information, vendor system could compare 
and thus find above mentioned cases and thus fix can be made. Language 
code can be a part of end customer address and also a part of 
messages/events where address information is included (postal address, 
invoice address).
18/02/2022 Ticket CSUSE0011351
1
1
0
2 The language code is problematic for the customer 
in the information if someone offers a service 
in several languages ​​and the other not. 
53
Development conditions
creature
Validation in the form of a number should be added to the phone number. 
The data standard defines the telephone number format ITU-
T E.164 (+358501234567) but datahub does not validate this 
however. 
Couldn't Datahub already validate the phone number? Titta knew how to do this, that phone number 
must be +358 without zero and spaces. Now we have dozens of incorrect phone numbers again, when 
phone numbers are automatically updated without saying +358 etc. against the rules.
Phone number format shall get a validation rule. Datahub has defined phone 
number is format ITU-T.164 (+358501234567) but datahub does not validate 
this.
28/04/2022 Ticket CSUSE0016632
1
0
0
2 Maintenance of information quality improves
Data quality issue
New validation rule
54
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
As an online company, we experience the cancellation code AR04 very strongly 
inconvenient. The AR04 code can be used for this batch 
the seller would have concluded the contract as a delivery contract. 
It can't really be like this, that the customer just cancels 
of the sale, if it is a delivery contract. So this one 
regarding the data hub should have a reasoning that no 
the delivery contract can be canceled with reason AR04, or if you can, 
the online contract should also be canceled in this context. 
It is not possible for the customer to receive from another seller 
of the delivery contract, if the seller obliged to deliver is 
already canceled the contract. 
Could the reason for this cancellation and its functionality 
bring up again if necessary in some new ones 
in development teams, we would see that this would require 
further definition/implementation towards the data hub.
As a DSO we see the cancellation code AR04 very complex. AR04 code can 
be used even supplier has made contract as delivery contract. That can't 
happen in real that end customer cancels only selling if there is delivery 
contract. Datahub should conclude that the delivery contract cannot be cancelled 
with AR04 code or if it can be cancelled, then the grid contract shall be cancelled 
as well. It is not possible that the end customer can receive delivery from another supplier 
contract if delivery responsible supplier has already canceled the contract.
Could this cancellation reason and its rules be re-evaluated in development 
workgroup. This requires new definitions to the datahub rules.
It is intended to discuss different solution options related to the AR04 rule 
for more general use:
1) Act as defined now, i.e. AR04 is in use: The parties must 
adapt to how datahub works and their own systems 
adapt to this. This also requires manual work for the data hub 
(changing the start date so that it is the same as the online contract, 
the operator makes a cancellation and the new seller has to announce the contract 
re). AR04 is a lot of action logic at the moment.
2) Let's change the AR04 operating logic in some way: Understandable what 
problems the current use of this causes for end customers and parties 
(e.g. big conceptual actions, etc. and what these actions are). Otherwise 
changes to the rules cannot be implemented.
3)Let's abandon the use of AR04 completely: network companies have to every time 
cancel your own contract when the seller cancels the contract. The thought has been 
in the background that the network contract would have remained there when using AR04. It has been 
situations where the online contract has not been concluded completely.
4/5/2022 Ticket CSUSE0019860
?
?
0
1 Causes a lot of manual processing 
in the direction of the network and if there is a network contract 
information cannot be canceled separately 
of the supply contract to remain wrong and 
causes problems e.g. of the customer 
in billing. 
From the minutes of the meeting of ET's development team: "We discussed the change of vendor, but 
not from the cancellation of the move, i.e. those reported to datahub with reason code AR04 
cancellations. It was pointed out that these AR04 cancellations cause a lot 
extra work and problems for network operators. In addition to the network, also to the new one 
the seller incurs manual measures during the contract days 
coordination. When the original sales contract is canceled with reason AR04, 
the network contract does not end in the data hub. When the new seller sends later 
for the date of the sales contract and the online contract is already valid with the customer, sales 
goes through as a vendor change and the network receives information that there is no new network contract 
need. However, if the network would like to change the start date of the network contract 
to correspond to the sales contract, the network should be canceled on a different day 
online contract, before the new one takes effect. At the same time, however, also new 
the seller's sales contract is cancelled. Solving the situation requires the seller and 
e-mail exchange between networks and re-notifications of contracts 
to datahub.
Experience has shown that the planned process does not serve as such 
practical work, but makes it more difficult. There should be a chance that 
the online contract could also end due to the cancellation of the sales contract and 
would then be born again on the basis of a new seller's announcement or otherwise should 
can change the start date of the online contract. 
It was concluded that the new datahub development team should consider whether to keep the process 
change and if so how. Decision-making support should be collected widely from users 
experiences and ask if you want to change the process. The secretary sends a wish 
For Fingrid Datahub.” 
New validation rule?
55
Development conditions
creature
The seller needs to get the customer's measurement data 
from the place of use, where the seller is not yet a seller, from three 
year retroactively instead of the current year.
Currently, the service provider's energy reporting authorization 
allows data search 3 years back
The supplier needs to get the end customer's measurement data from accounting 
point where supplier is not yet valid supplier, three years retrospectively instead 
of one year. At the moment service provider authorization for energy reporting 
allows data request 3 years retrospectively.
13 May 2022
1
0
0
2
56 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
The contract code should be added to message DH-341-3: 
How to restore the DH-341-3 message alignment 
a contract must be made. We have encountered a situation, 
where the place of use now has a valid sales contract 
and a sales contract starting in the future. Another seller 
announces the current contract for moving in 
for time, from which it follows that starting in the future 
the sales contract is canceled (message DH-311-5).
The move-in made by another seller was canceled and the datahub 
sent two DH-341-3 messages (identical except 
unique identifier of the message). How those messages 
belongs to target returnable contracts when they have 
as information only the user location ID and the one that has been cancelled 
move in date?
If the cancellation of the sales contract reinstates the previous or future sales contract, 
the cancellation is sent to the seller of the returned contract. However, there is no information (ID) in the message 
of the contract based on which the message was sent. E.g. if two are returned to the same seller 
contract, the seller receives the same message twice (the only difference is the message ID). 
Agreement identification should be added to the DH-341-3 notification.
We had a case where a metering point had a valid sales agreement and also a 
sales agreement starting in the future. Another supplier reported a move-in 
ending the valid agreement and canceling the future agreement.
Move-in made by the other supplier was canceled and datahub sent two DH-
341-3 Notifications (fully identical except for the message id). How should the 
Notifications be connected to the restored agreements when they include only a 
metering point id and the date of the canceled moved-in?
Add to the message the identifier of the reinstated contract, which 
based on the DH-341-3 notification is sent from the data hub to the party.
Add identification of the restored agreement (based on which the 
notification is sent) to the DH-341-3 notification.
16/05/2022 Ticket CSUSE0020080
2
1
0
1 The seller cannot target which one 
the notice applies to the contract if there has been one 
two contracts that are returned 
the new agreement enters into force 
in cancellation.
57
Development conditions
creature,meeting 
2
Change of the usage location status from Under Construction to Connected 
the definition should be re-evaluated. Functionality with this 
at the moment is that if we are building in a temporary place of use 
is a valid contract at the time of connection, change 
datahub automatically the date of entry into force of the contract 
according to the connection. This serves new properties 
processing. But the same functionality is also available when 
when the place of use has been changed to a space due to renovation 
under construction, without affecting the contractual situation. In this case, if 
the network changes the state to directly connected, changes 
the effective date of the agreement with the same rules, for example 
in this situation you shouldn't. 
Metering point state change from "Under construction" to the "Switched" rules 
shall be re-evaluated. The current rules say that if metering point "Under 
construction" has valid contract when it is switch on, datahub will automatically 
contract valid start from date according to the switching date. This Servers 
handling of new metering points. But the same functionality/rules are valid as well 
when metering point has been changed due to renovation to the "Under 
construction" state, without updates on contract state. In that case if DSO 
changes the status directly to switched on, changes the contract valid from date 
with the same rules, even should not in this case.
It is intended to discuss different solution options regarding the under construction status 
for the use of:
1) One option for the discussion: Let's add a new place of use status 
in "renovation". The target can be marked by updating the location information (DH-
122) to the under renovation status. When the item is later reported as connected 
(DH-412) directly from the under-renovation facility, any valid ones 
the dates of the contracts do not change.
2) What other options?
5/18/2022 CSUSE0020895
2
1
0
1 The implemented model currently causes 
much regret for the parties involved. Switching mode 
change causes contracts 
the update of the effective dates as well 
when the object is under renovation and 
changed to status under construction. There is 
instructed that in this case the place of use will come 
first change to disconnected, before 
connection. This is how contracts are avoided 
from the update. 
For discussion, could the change be e.g. different connection mode for renovation objects? 
In this case, there would be no need to build complex reasoning beforehand 
based on contract/connection status. 
58
Development conditions
creature
The distribution system operator should always notify 
in meter removal situations, first the conclusion of the contract and 
after that, only the related disconnection notification. This 
would make it easier for the seller to recognize that the disconnection is related to this 
for meter removal, and not e.g. based on network receivables 
to the cut made. 
DSO shall inform always first contract ending in case meter has been removed 
and after that the switch off. This would help the supplier to recognize that switch 
off is related to the meter removal, not e.g. switch off made based on the grid 
receivables.
5/23/3033 Ticket CSUSE0020482
0
0
0
2 To be discussed in the working group, whether 
this is made possible by distribution system operators 
from view. Instructions for doing this 
in accordance with. No changes needed datahub 
to the system. Is there a need to change something 
for networks? 
59 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
For transaction DH-124-1 a new validation rule, which 
according to the seller cannot request BE14 as user group, if 
exact user group information has already been defined for the place of use. 
At the moment, it works with automation in the network systems and 
already more precisely defined information erodes with this
New validation rule for the event DH-124-1 so that supplier cannot be requested as 
user group BE14 in case there has been defined specific user group for the 
metering point. At the moment DSO systems update user groups automatically 
and thus the specific user group information is updated and lost.
A new validation rule for transaction DH-124-1, according to which the seller cannot 
update the user group to BE14 (other destination), if there is already one for the user location 
defined exact user group information by the distribution network company. 
Add a new validation rule to the event DH-124-1 that supplier cannot 
update user group to BE14 (other) in case accounting point already has 
a specific user group set by the DSO. 
13/05/2022 Ticket CSUSE0020576
1
1
0
1 Maintenance of information quality improves. Bridge 
at the moment the user group goes 
automatically to the place of use of the network 
in systems and more precisely 
defined information is lost and corroded 
with this.
The seller is unable to update 
user group if it already exists 
by the distribution network company 
defined.
60
Double (56)
The party hopes that, in the event of cancellation, the forwarded DH-
341-3, the contract would also be forwarded in the message 
the identifier for which the party in question sent the message 
receive. This need therefore arose in a situation where 
the same seller also has a previous contract at the place of use 
(which has ended with the notice of the contract to be cancelled 
in connection) as well as a canceled contract for the future (which 
canceled the notice of the now cancelable contractin connection with). In this situation, the seller receives two 
identical DH-341-3 message and party system 
cannot handle such a situation. They say it would make it easier 
processing, if it were known for which contract DH-
341-3 message is received.
5/31/2022 CSUSE0017481
61
Development conditions
creature
The role of the balance sheet manager
What costs will the balance sheet manager incur if it is related 
To Datahub with your own ID (no own 
balanced delivery)? Because eSett apparently doesn't 
deliver 15 min of data in their own data packages 
for balance sheet managers as soon as Datahub delivers it to eSett, yes 
whether corresponding data is available in Datahub's REST interface 
through automatically to balance sheet managers, or should the sellers 
and network companies authorize them separately for balance sheet managers? 
That is, the sum of the seller's sales/network, the sum of the cut-off points of the network 
etc. it would be about time series searches.
ML: There is no automatic interface for this 
the messages of the balance sheet would also be received by the balance sheet supervisors 
available. In this case, it would go to the seller/network 
through assignment. At least not in these situations 
so far there is no chance that the messages will be received 
with the assignment for both parties, i.e. should come then 
only to the person in charge of the balance sheet, if the seller authorizes it.
5/5/2022 CSUSE0020008
3
3
0
3
62
Development conditions
creature
Time Series Data For Accounting Points report time-
step
The Time Series Data For Accounting Points report would have 
good to be able to select different time steps. Currently the report 
only get one hour time step.
For consumption comparisons, daily or monthly steps would be 
usable.
Are there plans to add a selection of steps to the report?
It should be possible to select different time resolution on "Time Series Data For 
Accounting Points" report. At the moment report can be run only with one hour 
resolution. To be able to make consumption comparisons by daily or monthly 
level would be useful.
4/13/2022 CSUSE0017588
2
0x
2
ML: “So far there are no known changes to this report in the upcoming 1.9.0 
version or in connection with DH 2.0. The report in question is basically intended 
for examining the time series data of measurement points, i.e. the time step is determined by the data 
in accordance with the resolution.
I will add this to the development suggestions group, from which ideas will be passed on.
63
Development conditions
creature
Development idea that the history of balance sheet agreements would be shown 
such as e.g. the history of the network contract is shown in the place of use 
contracts & products below
It should be possible to view balance contract history, e.g. grid contract history 
is visible under metering point/contract&product.
3/30/2022 CSUSE0016539
2
0x
2
ML: "Thank you for the development idea! The same wish also came from the other party. 
Visibility of the balance agreement history would make networks much easier 
reviews of possible balance sheet contract deficiencies. We find out if there are any of these 
addition is possible, for example, in the next version update.
64
Development conditions
creature
The accuracy of the measurement data
In the energy industry electricity measurement and balance settlement working group 
we discussed the accuracy of the measurement data. Especially when moving 
For a 15-minute measurement in small areas, it would be good to recommend 1Wh 
recording resolution.
Previously, it was asked if Datahub also accepts 1Wh 
accurate measurement data and then we were left with the understanding that 
Measurement data could be delivered to Datahub with an accuracy of 1Wh.
In the guide: Business processes of the electricity retail market in Datahub 
on page 106 it says so
"For applications with a fuse size or equivalent
the electric power is a maximum of 3x63 A, the measurement data must be reported for 10 watt hours 
give or take. In other respects
measurement data must be reported with an accuracy of at least a kilowatt hour"
This instruction can now be interpreted so that Datahub could be delivered more precisely 
than 10Wh accuracy measurement data.
Should that instruction be updated so that it becomes clear that it can also be used? 
1Wh accuracy, but 10Wh accuracy is the minimum requirement?
Or have we misunderstood and you can't get 10Wh with more detailed information 
reports measurement data.
ML: "So the measurement data can be delivered with an accuracy of 1 Wh. However 
for places of use with a maximum fuse size or electrical power corresponding to this 
3X63 A, measurement data must be delivered with an accuracy of at least 10 Wh.
Your comment is good and this could be specified more clearly in the instructions. 
I will put this forward on the list of development suggestions.
All time series data would be sent to datahub with 1 Wh resolution and clarify 
the instructions for resolution to be used for sending data with different fuses 
sizes.
According to the proposal of ET's hourly measurement and balance settlement working group, everything 
measurement data will be delivered to datahub 2.0 after commissioning 1 Wh 
give or take. Datahub already currently has the technical readiness to receive the data 
against 1 Wh accuracy, also for maximum 3x63A fuse size 
in terms of places of use.
9/12/2021 CSUSE0009450
0
0
0
2
65 1.9.0 p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
DH-810 design changes needed
1) New Customer Authorization by Supplier (DH-811)
-remove from design DDQ authorization AP01=Energy reporting 
(customer has agreement at the AP)
-add validation for DDQ not to be able to authorize with AP01=Energy 
reporting (customer has agreement at the AP)
2 New Customer Authorization by Third Party (DH-812)
-remove from design 3. party authorization AP02=Bid request (customer 
has agreement at the AP) and AP04=Bid request (customer hasn't 
agreement at the AP)
-add validation for 3.party not to be able to authorize with AP02=Bid 
request (customer has agreement at the AP) and AP04=Bid request  
(customer has not agreed at the AP)
3) New Customer Authorization by DSO (DH-813)
- not needed
-add validation for DSO not to be able to authorize (authorisation is only 
possible with the role THP)
CAP changes
1) CAP should show only the organizations that are able to permit 
authorizations (not else)
INCUSE0000056492 - DH9 CAP: all organizations in CMS are displayed 
in CAP in authorization creation
This change would remove eg. the companies made for assignments 
2) Additionally there should be noted the changes needed for assignment 
groups
Note: Design document changes also need to take place due to this 
change
Authorization for energy reporting should only be possible for the THP role. In addition, it is deleted for the 3rd party 
unnecessary authorization purposes.
Required DH-810 changes:
1) DH-811 Customer authorization - seller
- Deliberately removing the authorization for the seller from the design AP01 = Energy reporting (customer has an agreement 
to the place of use)
- New rule to prevent the creation of an authorization for a seller on purpose AP01
2) DH-812 Customer authorization - 3rd party
- We remove the authorization from the design to the 3rd party with the purposes of AP02 = Request for quotation (the customer has an agreement 
for the place of use) and AP04 = Request for quotation (the customer does not have a contract for the place of use) 
- New rule to prevent creation of authorization for 3rd party with AP2 or AP04 purpose
3) DH-813 Customer currency exchange - network operator
- Not needed, the network operator cannot create an authorization (-> the network operator can act as the customer's authorization only with the THP role)
- New rule to prevent the creation of an authorization for the network operator
CAP changes:
1) In CAP, only organizations are displayed for which it is possible to give authorization (at the moment, you can also choose e.g. 
organizations that have a mandate, but these cannot be used for authorizations). Note also that in the future 
authorization cannot be created for the network operator (only when acting in the THP role).
2) The above-mentioned changes must also be taken into account when the customer makes the authorization in CAP (DH-820). To the customer 
the same rules apply to authorizations reported with DH-810. 
Note Design documents must also be updated as part of this change. 
For authorization type "Energy reporting" is according to the process document 
possible to grant authorization only to the role third party (THP). Currently 
datahub's validations allow this for other roles as well. Let's change the validations 
so that this will only be allowed with the role THP ie 
service provider.
Necessary changes to the DH-810 process:
1) DH-811 Customer authorization - seller
- New rule to prevent the creation of an authorization for a seller with reason AP01= 
Energy reporting
2) DH-812 Customer authorization - 3rd party
- New rule to prevent creation of authorization for 3rd party with reason 
AP02=Request for quotation (the customer has a contract for the place of use) or
AP03=Tendering of the contract as a service (the customer has a contract for the place of use)
3) DH-813 Customer authorization - network operator
- New rule to prevent the creation of an authorization for the network operator
CAP changes related to DH-800 process changes above:
1) CAP should only show the organizations to which the end customer is entitled 
to give authorization (currently, for example, also organizations that have been created 
for assignments is shown in CAP). This change would remove e.g 
companies created for assignments.
2) The changes described above also apply to the CAP/DH-820 process. The same 
the rules for creating authorizations apply to both the DH-810 process and 
creation of authorizations for end customers in CAP.
For authorization type "Energy reporting" is according to the process 
documentation possible to give authorization only for third party (THP) 
role. At the moment datahub validation allows that for other roles as well. 
Change the validation rules so that the reporting is allowed only for THP 
(service provider) role.
Needed changes into DH-810 process:
1) New Customer Authorization by Supplier (DH-811):
 - new rule to prevent creation of authorization for the supplier with 
reason AP01 = Energy reporting
2) New Customer Authorization by Third Party (DH-812):
 - new rule to prevent creation of authorization for the third party with 
reason AP02 = Bid ​​request (customer has agreement at the accounting 
point) or AP03 = Contract competitive Tendering as service (customer 
agreement to accounting point)
3) New Customer Authorization by DSO (DH-813):
- add new rule to prevent creation of authorization forDSO
CAP changes related to the DH-800 changes above:
1) CAP shall only show the organizations that can be authorized 
(currently, for example, also organizations with delegations are shown, 
but these shall not be used for authorizations).
This change would remove e.g. the companies made for delegations.
2) The changes mentioned above also apply to CAP/DH-820. The 
same rules for creating authorizations apply to both DH-810 and to 
customers creating authorizations in the CAP.
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031599
2
1
0
1 This causes a lot of manual work for the datahub 
inspection work to be done every month 
in connection with invoicing. Datahub 
checks that customers are not billed 
over.
Very critical change, asap.
66
Development conditions
creature
CGI FI/NL New Feature: Invoicing channel name has 
changed
The name of invoicing channel AI05=Netposti has changed to OmaPosti. This 
would need to be changed in CMS as well so that it is also correctly shown to 
end-customers in CAP. 
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031223
1
1
2
67 1.9.0
Implemented
CGI FI New Feature: DH-321-1 Update of an agreement 
with fixed term fails if the start of fixed term is more than 3.5 
years in the past
The validation rule VR.AGR.051.202U blocks the changes of all fixed terms 
agreements, if the fixed term start date is older than -1280 
(CP_AGRUPDSLS_FTS_MIN_PERIOD) or the fixed term end date is newer than 
90 (CP_AGRUPDSLS_FTS_MAX_PERIOD).
The logic of the rule is incorrect. The rule needs to be changed so that, if the time 
limits of the fixed term start date and fixed term end date of the message are 
different from the dates of the agreement, then the date verification is done.
If the fixed term dates of the message and the agreement are the same, then the 
rule is not verified.
The idea is to allow the updates of the agreement if the fixed term starts and ends 
dates are not changed without limitations of the fixed term dates.
DH-321-1 update of a fixed-term contract fails if the initial period is 
more than 3.5 years in the past.
Audit rule VR.AGR.051.202U prevents all periodic 
contract changes if the start date of the term is older than 
1280 days or more than 90 days in the future.
The logic of the rule was wrong. The rule has been changed so that a check is made 
only if the start or end date of the deadline differs in the message 
of the dates in the contract. If the due dates 
in the message and the contract are the same, no check is made. The purpose is 
to allow the contract to be updated without restrictions on the dates of the term, 
if the start and end dates of the term do not change in the update. 
DH-321-1 Update of an agreement with fixed term fails if the start of 
fixed term is more than 3.5 years in the past.
The validation rule VR.AGR.051.202U blocks the changes to all fixed 
term agreements if the fixed term start date is older than -1280 days or 
more than 90 days in the future.
The logic of the rule was incorrect. The rule has been changed so that 
the validation is done only if the fixed term start date or fixed term end 
date of the message is different from the existing fixed term dates of the 
agreement.
If the fixed term dates of the message and the agreement are the same, 
the rule is not used.
The idea is to allow agreement updates without the limitations of the 
fixed term dates if the fixed term start and end dates are not changed in 
the update.
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031301
1
0
1
68
Development conditions
creature
CGI FI New Feature: US 7303 Agreement cancellation 
reason dropdown options for DSO and DDQ
The agreement cancellation reason in the GUI uses the list ACR_MP for both 
DSO and DDQ.
The list contains reasons AR01, AR03, AR03 and AR04.
For a DDQ the reason AR03 (Agreement canceled by the DSO) should not be 
included.
For a DSO the reason AR02 (Agreement canceled by the supplier) is not a valid 
option.
There should be separate lists for DSOs and for DDQs.
Also the option AR04 should be available only when the agreement is a move-in 
agreement, not a change of supplier.
06/09/2022 CSUSE0008132
CHGUSE0000031237
1
0
2 Usability improvement
- remove ACR_MP and replace with 
ACR_DSO (AR01, AR03, AR04) and 
ACR_DDQ (AR01, AR02, AR04)
- update ACR_MP in GUI to 
ACR_DDQ(Cancel Sales Agreement) 
and ACR_DSO(Cancel Grid 
agreement)
- update VR.AGR.998.128A for a 
variant for ACR_DDQ and one for 
ACR_DSO
- Create a new validation rule to 
check AR04 only allowed when the 
agreement is a move-in 
agreement(Reason for Agreement 
Start is AT03). (It is not possible to 
make the screen that smart).
The content of the ACR_DSO should 
include AR01, AR02 and AR03. The 
AR04 should not be included.
 - The reason to include the AR01 and 
AR02 in the list of DSO is that the 
DSO should reply to the cancellation 
with the same code than the DDQ 
used in the original cancel request.
69 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
CGI FI New Feature: Grid agreement and sales agreement 
handled differently after cancellation with reason AR01 
ooutside balance window
In design document FDCMD.340 in scenario 5 cancellation with reason 
AR01 outside balance window it is described that previous sales 
agreement is not restored after the cancellation. DH-341-3 message is 
sent to previous supplier and they can submit a new agreement for the 
previous customer after the period during which the canceled agreement 
is valid in datahub. The previous grid agreement, however, is restored. 
Grid agreement should be handled like the sales agreement on the 
accounting point so previous grid agreement should not be restored and 
the same end date should be given to the grid agreement. If the previous 
supplier submits a new sales agreement on the ACP, a new grid 
agreement will be created and confirmed according to the normal 
process. 
When the contract is retroactively canceled outside the balance window, using 
reason code AR01 customer cancellation, the online contract behaves differently 
than a sales contract. Let's change the functionality so that the network contract 
should be treated like the sales contract for the place of use, so earlier 
the online contract should not be reinstated and the online contract should be given 
the same end date as the sales contract. If the previous seller delivers 
of a new sales contract, a new online contract is created and confirmed 
according to the normal process.
The agreement is canceled retrospectively outside of the balance window 
by using reason code AR01 (customer cancellation), behaves the grid 
agreement differently than sales agreement. Change functionality ie 
that grid agreement is handled similarly as the sales agreement on the 
accounting point. Thus the previous grid agreement shall not be restored 
valid and grid agreement shall get the same end date as for sales 
agreement. If previous supplier notifies new sales agreement, the new 
grid agreement will be created and confirmed according to the normal 
process.
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031610
1
1
0
1 The justification for this change is that 
the web contract must behave 
in the same way as a sales contract. 
In general, discuss whether or not 
the need to do other functionality 
In relation to AR01, to get the parties 
to use the correct reason codes. Otherwise 
causes manual work for datahub 
work and contacts with the parties. 
The system has a lot of automation 
behind the reason codes which cannot be herewith 
take advantage of as much as you can 
possible.
70 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
CGI FI New Feature: The DSO needs to be able to end grid 
agreement that has not yet started
At some point we have changed the DH-331 process so that the supplier 
can end the sales agreement that is starting in the future. The DSO 
needs to be able to end the corresponding grid agreement as well. At the 
moment DSO can only end the grid agreement that is valid when the 
ending is reported.
The rule for terminating an online contract (DH-333) is removed: "To be terminated 
the online agreement must be valid until the termination event 
at the time of notification." This way you can announce the termination of the online contract before 
effective date of the online agreement. 
Remove validation "Agreement must be valid and confirmed on reporting 
date" from the grid agreement ending process (DH-333). Thus grid 
agreement ending can be notified before the grid agreement is valid.
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031235
1
1
0
1 Network and sales contracts must 
act in the same way.
71 1.9.0
Implemented
CGI FI New Feature: Cancellation of disconnection is not 
restoring balance agreement
Cancellation of disconnection is not restoring balance agreement 
to the accounting point. This functionality is missing from the 
design and implementation. 
At the moment, the balance agreements remain erroneously terminated in connection with cancellations of the disconnection.
Due to disconnection cancellation events (DH-424, DH-411)) balance agreement 
power is restored, i.e. the end of the settlement is cancelled.
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031379
72
Double (69)
CGI FI - Configuration Update: Grid agreement might get 
wrong end date after cancellation with reason AR01 outside the 
balance window and no previous agreements
In design document FD.CMD.340 scenario 7 after cancellation of the sales 
agreement with reason AR01 outside the balance window and no previous 
agreements it is described that the canceled agreement remains valid during the 
period from the original start date of the now canceled Sales/Balance Agreement 
until the cancellation reporting date (i.e. today).  After the cancellation DH-341-2 
is forwarded to the DSO and they are expected to cancel the corresponding grid 
agreement. 
In the design (3.7.4.1.2.7) it also says that the grid agreement remains valid during 
the period from the original start date of the now canceled Grid Agreement until 
the cancellation reporting date (i.e. today). So if the DSO does not cancel their 
grid agreement on the same day as the sales agreement is cancelled, grid 
agreement gets a different end date than the sales agreement on the accounting 
point. This leads to DSO and supplierinvoicing the same customer from different 
periods. 
The grid agreement should be ended on the same date as the sales agreement if 
grid agreement is ended as a response to sales agreement cancellation. 
Change created based on already closed incident INCUSE0000056115.
9/6/2022 INCUSE0000056115
CHGUSE0000031629
6/6/2022 State: New
2
73 2.0
Implemented
CGI NL New Feature: Datahub CMS show exchange points 
on the None status list even thought there's been data for 
days
Change ticket created from incident INCUSE0000053906
Feature, discussed on the incident ticket, has already been designed to datahub 
2.0, in CR 118
Is it possible to get this feature already in use as it already exists?
SQP Dashboard show one-directional exchange points' other measurement point 
on the None status list. On one-directional exchange point the other 
measurement is not active and data is not required for that.  The in-active points 
should be removed from the SQP Dashboard None status list.
Incident INCUSE0000053904 created about the same issue but on measurement 
data reminders.
The other direction of a limit point defined as one-way is no longer displayed in the SQP-
Dashboard (balance sheet quality and location view) Missing(None) -
in the list of statuses according to the definitions of the border point.
At the moment, these are erroneously included, even though there is no measurement data 
required for these.
Similarly, one-way border points are sent in both directions 
reminders of measurement data. In the future, reminders will only go in the direction, 
from which measurement data is expected.
INCUSE0000053906
CHGUSE0000031324
74 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature
CGI FI/NL New feature: Virtual production unit is not 
generated for future generation type changes
Virtual production units are not generated in cases where DSO has changed 
generation type of the production and sales agreement for the acp is done 
afterwards for the period where the "old" generation type is still active.
At present only the active generation type of the acp is the start date of the sales 
agreement is taken into account when creating the virtual production unit. So 
possible changes in the production type in the future (after the start date of the 
sales agreement) should be taken into account. So a VPUs should be generated 
also for that production type.
CHGUSE0000031642
1
0
0
1
That is, there are situations where the production unit is not generated at all and because of that 
information cannot be reported to eSett.
Of course, no changes are required to those interfaces etc. on the eSett side
There are cases where the production unit is not generated at all and that causes that 
information cannot be reported to the eSett. But this does not require changes to 
interface on the eSett site.
75 2.1 or 2.0 
p
Development conditions
creature
Validation rule for using only capital letters in Post office in 
both invoicing address and postal address
In the Datahub Data standard it is mentioned that the post office should contain only 
capital letters. At the moment there is no validation rule for which kind of
letters are used (capital letters / lower case letters). Only capital letters should be 
allowed if the address is in Finland. For foreign addresses no validation rule 
should be used.
Always transfer lower case to upper case.
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031639
1
0
0
1
76
Development conditions
creature
New Role for Other DDQ type of market party that only 
use GUI
We have a need to create a new user role for DDQ's that are suppliers for 
production units, but do not serve the entire energy market. 
For these market parties we want to have a new user role for GUI, with a very 
limited set of system functions.
The new role should be named OtherDDQ
The role needs to have access to search, view and receive metering (Dh-200) and 
Settlement (DH-500) data for production units. 
I tested in Conv01 the role set-up and did not manage to find the exact one 
combination.
Below snippet of assigned sub-roles also give access to following searches, that 
should not be accessible fot these other DDQ's
accounting point, sales agreement and product
I then assigned the following system functions for the role, but then I'm missing 
access to meter data.
Accounting Point Get (ACP.GET)
Get time series data from kx (getcalcs) (STS.GTS)
Imbalance Settlement Data Request (STS.RTR.DDQ)
List Production Units (PRU.LST)
Listing Energy Time Series (ETS.LST)
Metering Point Authorization Retrieve PRU (AGR.RTR.PRU)
Retrieve Energy Time Series UI (ETS.LST.GUI)
Retrieve Metering Point (MPT.RTR)
Retrieve Production Unit (PRU.RTR)
Retrieve Settlement Run Details (SMR.RTR.DTL)
Retrieve Timeseries (ETS.RTR)
Retrieve time series by TS type. (STS.TTS)
Search Accounting Points (ACP.FND)
Search Settlement (STS.LST)
Search Settlement Runs (SMR.LST)
Search TimeSeries (STS.LST_Results)
View Settlement Run (SMR.RTR)
Pls, identify the required set of system functions for the new role and include it in 
the standard roles (when tested and approved)
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031254
2
0
2
77
Development conditions
creature
MP: Add Dormant Users report to Market party Admin roles
Dormant user report in GUI is now only accessible for MOP. 
Market party admins, would benefit from the report and it would 
make it easier for them to identify and manage Dormant users 
and through this make Datahub more secure.
Add system function RPT-SEC-DMT to roles Security report 
and authorize these for DSO_Admin, DDQ_Admin and 
THP_admin 
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031589
1
0
0
1
78 1.9.0 p
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
Consumers Customer Identification (personal identification) 
is to allow also other divider signs than - / A
Finnish government is renewing the personal identifications to ensure that ID's do 
not run out. In the beginning of 2023, new customer identifications can contain 
also other signs than -/A as the divider. 
This change is to remove the validation that the personal identification can contain 
only -/A. It is possible to also change the validation to accept the new dividers 
(once they are defined by the regulator). 
The divider is not to impact the check-digit calculation.
In addition, there can be 'estate of deceased person' customers that have 
personal IDs for people born in the 19th century (sign '+' in the personal ID, e.g. 
DDMMYY+1234), and therefore '+' must also be accepted in the personal 
identification.
The most urgent change needs of the reform of the Ministry of Finance's personal identification number system are related to personal identification numbers 
to ensure adequacy. From the beginning of 2023, new punctuation marks 1900 and 
For those born in the 21st century:
- For those born in the 21st century, starting with B in addition to the current letter A (A, B, C, D, E, F, H, J, K, L, M).
- For those born in the 20th century, on the contrary, starting from Y in addition to the current sign (-, Y, X, W, V, U, T, S, R, P, N).
Datahub must be able to handle the new punctuation marks. 
In addition, estate clients who have a deceased person's hetu that dates back to the 1800s must be considered 
with generated punctuation marks '+'. Datahub must also accept this punctuation mark.
The most urgent need in changing the personal identification system is related to 
ensuring that there are enough personal identification numbers in the future. 
From the beginning of 2023, new divider signs/letters will be introduced into the 
personal identity number for those born in the 20th and 21st centuries:
- For those born in the 21st century, letters starting from B, in addition to the current one 
letter A (A, B, C, D, E, F, H, J, K, L, M).
- For those born in the 20th century, letters starting from Y, in addition to the current one 
sign - (-, Y, X, W, V, U, T, S, R, P, N).
Datahub must accept the new divider signs/letters in the personal identification number.
In addition, there can be 'estate of deceased person' customers who have personal IDs 
for people born in the 19th century (sign '+' in the personal ID, e.g. DDMMYY+1234), 
and therefore '+' must also be accepted as a divider sign in the personal identification.
Let's change the existing validation rule so that the new punctuation marks are also allowed 
in the personal identification number. From the beginning of 2023, new ones will be introduced to the personal identification number 
punctuation marks for those born in the 20th and 21st centuries:
- for those born in the 21st century, starting with B, in addition to the current letter A (A, B, C, D, E, F, 
H, J, K, L, M).
- For those born in the 20th century, on the contrary, starting from Y, in addition to the current sign (-, Y, 
X, W, V, U, T, S, R, P, N).
Datahub must be able to handle the new punctuation marks. 
In addition, estate customers who have the benefit of the deceased person must be taken into account, 
which is with the punctuation mark '+', born in the 19th century. Datahub must accept 
also this punctuation mark.
Change the existing validation rule to also allow the new signs. From the 
beginning of 2023, new divider signs/letters will be introduced into the staff 
identity number for those born in the 20th and 21st centuries:
- For those born in the 21st century, letters starting from B, in addition to the 
current letter A (A, B, C, D, E, F, H, J, K, L, M).
- For those born in the 20th century, letters starting from Y, in addition to the 
current sign - (-, Y, X, W, V, U, T, S, R, P, N).
Datahub must accept the new divider signs/letters in the personal identification 
number.
In addition, there can be 'estate of deceased person' customers that have 
personal IDs for people born in the 19th century (sign '+' in the personal ID, 
e.g. DDMMYY+1234), and therefore '+' must also be accepted as a divider 
sign in the personal identification.
9/6/2022 CHGUSE0000031603
1
0
0
1 The new dividers can be issued both to 
newborn children but also the 
immigrants getting a Finnish personal 
identification, which is why the change 
needs to be in affect from the beginning 
of year 2023.
It should be noted that we have at least an estate of customers who have 
the late person's hetu, which is punctuated by those born in the 19th century 
+, so it would probably also be good to take that into account in that future change.
79 2.0
Implemented
Based on information on PRBUSE0000040212 following 
limitations are acceptable to avoid out-of-memory issues 
poppamies-application Servers for mdm-mdm-med-meter-
data service
Fingrid is suggesting that CGI should add the following 
validation rule to DH-220 events:
- limit requests that have over 1 month time period
- F08 messages should not have that limitation if there is 
1..n accounting points in ACP list
The message is checked in advance before it is sent to the internal data hub 
processing. Datahub is able to limit requests for time series data by a certain amount 
in the distribution network area. Accuracy level of 15-minute time series data datahub 2.0 
version still requires a separate implementation for the restriction.
This validation of the message upfront before sending it into Kx.  With 
this CMS can restrict the time period of requests for time series data 
based on just the grid area (DSO). 15 minutes time series data resolution 
in datahub 2.0 still requires implementation of this restriction separately.
CHGUSE0000031448
PRBUSE0000040212
1
0x
1
80
Development conditions
creature
Accounting point information available for authorized 
parties per business ID
A third party would be able to receive a list of all the accounting points of its customer based on the 
customer's business ID.
Could this be implemented as some sort of request, which then returns a list?
2 The customer might have many (e.g. 
100) accounting points and the amount 
of accounting points may vary. A third 
party should provide service to the 
customer but might be missing some 
accounting points if the number of 
customer's accounting points has 
increased but the customer has not 
informed the third party. So, some of 
the accounting points remain out of the 
scope of the service unintentionally, and 
the party does not have any visibility in 
datahub to notice the missing 
accounting points.
A party needs to know both the business ID of the customer and the accounting 
point ID in order to find the needed accounting point to notify an authorization to 
the accounting point. 
81
Development conditions
creature
Authorization to be given via the customer Portals of the 
third parties in addition to the datahub end customer Portal
In addition to datahub CAP, the authorization could be given in the third party's system/customer portal. 
The issue is that Fingrid Datahub needs to be able to verify that the end customer has given their consent 
and is aware that they are given such a permission to the third party. It could be further examined, whether 
it would be possible to have some sort of a redirection/link from the third party's Portal to datahub CAP, so 
that the authorization could be given via third party's Portal but Fingrid Datahub could still be able to verify 
that the end customer has given their consent.
2 If the authorization could be given via 
the service provider, the customer would 
not need to log in to several systems but 
could complete all required steps to 
purchase the desired service in one 
system. The customer experience could 
be improved through such practice. 
A customer (in case of private end customer) needs to give the authorization in 
the end customer portal, and the authorization cannot be given in any other way 
(for instance in a third party's application/system which would have an integration 
to datahub)
82
Development conditions
creature
Closer to real-time metering data availability in datahub
At the moment, the metering data is delivered to datahub once per day (according to the Government 
Decree on the Settlement and metering of electricity supplies (767/2021)). The decree does not prohibit a 
more frequent delivery, but in practice the data is mostly delivered once a day. A more frequent delivery 
would require changes to the current decree, and most likely changes to the datahub system so that the 
system would function as it should. The development idea is that the metering data would be delivered 
more Frequently to datahub.
2 If the metering data were delivered to 
datahub closer to real time, the need for 
several meters in one accounting point 
due to several service providers could 
be decreased, as the service providers 
could use the metering data of the main 
meter.
At the moment, the metering data is delivered to datahub once per day 
(according to the Government Decree on the Settlement and metering of 
electricity supplies (767/2021)). The decree does not prohibit a more frequent 
delivery, but in practice the data is mostly delivered once a day.
83
Development conditions
creature
Metering data delivery of others (such as submitted) 
metering data to datahub
For now, only validated metering data, which is used for
imbalance Settlement and customer invoicing, is delivered to datahub. However, other data may be 
metered is an accounting point as well. The other metering data can be, for instance, the metering data of 
local solar power production. An accounting point may also have several submeters which meter the 
consumption of different areas within the accounting point. The development idea is that such other 
metering data could also be delivered to datahub.
2 The advantage of such other metering 
data delivery
would be that all metering data of an 
accounting point would be kept in one 
place. Nowadays, customers are locked 
to the service provider they have 
chosen in the Purchasing moment of 
service, and the historical metering data 
is lost if the customer changes their 
service provider.
For now, only validated metering data, which is used for imbalance settlement 
and customer invoicing, is delivered to datahub. 
84
Development conditions
creature
Granting delegations is a more specific level than based 
is an event
For now, delegations in datahub are granted based on events or entities. The delegation covers the whole 
event, and the delegation cannot be granted only for a particular type of the concerned event.
Delegations could be granted on a more specific level than based on an event. That is, the delegation 
could be granted, for instance, based on an event type, reason code or such
2 The change would be needed for 
disconnection and connection requests, 
to separate debt collection related 
disconnections from others 
disconnections.
For now, delegations in datahub are granted based on events or entities. The 
the delegation covers the entire event, and the delegation cannot be granted only 
for a particular type of the concerned event.
85
Development conditions
creature
Possibility to determine whether acknowledgments were 
sent to delegated and/or delegating party
It shall be possible to determine in the delegation whether the
acknowledgments in the conducted events were sent to only the delegated party or both the delegates 
and the delegating party.
2 Both delegating party and delegated 
party might need the information 
received from the request message.
If a delegated party conducts the disconnection requests on behalf of another 
party, the delegating party does not receive information received to the request 
message.
86
Development conditions
creature
Production type of the customer's energy visibile for third 
parties
The third parties would have the visibility to the production type of their customer's energy, at least for 
company customers.
2 A third party who has suggested the 
idea would use the information in their 
tool that they have created to support 
companies to increase the Sustainability 
of their business. The availability of 
production type information could 
encourage the companies to shift to 
renewable energy.
The production type of customer's energy is not available for third parties. 
87
Development conditions
creature
it would be good if the reports were also visible in the future 
review date. E.g. Place of use information rarpotti 
we have to drive on different days to see certain defects. 
Now even those familiar with the user interface cannot see the report 
review date, i.e. on which review date is the report 
drove? The date of the request is found, but should also be 
review date, because it can, however, report 
to search for drive parameters.
2/24/2022 CSUSE0012923
1
0
3 Usability improvement
88
Development conditions
creature
How is it thought that the sender can validate the information 
arriving at Datahub reliably? 
You can only view through https://portaali.datahub.fi/ 
a maximum of 1000 lines sent at the same time 
at the moment. E.g. 3/3/2022 4:44 PM sent more than 4,000 
1000 invoice data lines of which export is possible. Sure 
the "incoming" acknowledgment comes from FG, so is that a sufficient way 
view the destination of outgoing data? 
In any case, that 1000 limit is bad if the need arises 
look at the larger mass.
3/4/2022 CSUSE0013988
?
0
3
89
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
The seller canceled the contract retroactively with reason AR04, new 
the seller wants to start the contract from the original 
from the date of moving
We have read the instructions on cancellations in the Electricity retail market business processes 
from the document in datahub and other instructions. We have not found an example of how in the following 
should act in the situation:
Seller A retroactively cancels his sale with reason AR04. Sales have started e.g. 8 March 2022 and the seller cancels 
the beginning of the agreement on 23 March 2022. In Datahub, the vendor information and balance sheet information remain valid on the date of cancellation 
for the previous period. Seller B then wants to start selling from the customer's original 
from the move-in date 8 March 2022. 
Since seller A's seller information is valid in the destination from March 8-23, 2022, seller B does not get his own contract 
straight through on the start date 8 March 2022. In this situation, the customer's contract has therefore started as a move and the seller B 
there is also a new salesperson at the place of use. How should the different parties act in this situation? Isn't it here 
in the situation, apply a locking process through which the sellers could agree retroactively 
from the launch date? 
We have received information from a seller that the network company should inform FG about seller A 
about deleting seller information from the data hub after receiving information from seller B that seller B wants to start selling 
from the customer's moving date 8.3. from Is this the right course of action, pdoes the network company work here 
as an intermediary based on the new seller B's e-mail? After all, there is no information on the web, for example, whether the seller wants to 
A uses his billing right. 
Such situations are relatively common, and that's why we would like your advice on how the network will work 
to act in these situations.
See section 54.
4/8/2022 CSUSE0017248
?
?
1
Same topic as #54 in the development proposal.
90
Development conditions
creature
CAP User interface:
1. The default value was English. In Finland maybe 50% 
the citizens get away with it.
2. When I point to a bar in the graph, two tooltips appear. 
One of these is too many
2.1 First tooltip: "Hero's Curve 16 7.36 Status 
OK". Only 7.36 should be displayed here, the other information is already there 
visible on the screen, no need to repeat!
2.2 Another tooltip "Saturday, Huh 30, 21:00". This 
completely vex!
2.3 So the only tooltip that is needed: "Sat 30.4. 7.36". And 
this should be displayed at the top of the bar so that the x-axis does not 
fuck off!
5/2/2022 CSUSE0019618
1
0
3
91
Development conditions
creature
Downloading CAP Data:
I downloaded my electricity consumption data. Entry on the first day of the search no 
succeeded directly: your data hub did not allow you to enter the day 
but had to grind one month at a time until I got there 
to the earliest possible date. In the search field 
so it should be easier to enter any date, and 
if it is older than there is data, then it is given out 
the data that is. The search must not stop there. On the contrary 
there should be a dot to select ALL existing 
data is loading.
In addition, there was no data format for the resulting CSV file 
properly clarified. What are those Z times? Something Yankee 
zulu times? Desomaals are in Finland, by the way 
standardly with a comma, not a period. 
Identification of the measuring point; Product 
type;Resolution;Unit type;Start time;Quantity;Quality
643006971023201558;8716867000030;PT1H;kWh;2017-
04-13T21:00:00Z;0.95;OK
643006971023201558;8716867000030;PT1H;kWh;2017-
04-13T22:00:00Z;0.79;OK
5/2/2022 CSUSE0019648
1
0
3
92
Development conditions
creature
CAP user interface:
you have set up a great new service. Nice 
when the electrical information is in one place and hopefully 
longer than some electricity companies offer. 
However, I would have a few ideas for service development 
offered because the current form doesn't really fit my own 
needs.
- The graph shows a maximum period of a year, for example 
selects the monthly view. It would be good to raise this 
popularly for a maximum of six years, so that you could compare 
long-term development, e.g. when doing housing transactions and 
when changing electrical usage habits. 
- In CSV export, it would be nice if you could choose 
complete the summation to the hour/day/week/month level. 
Many, including myself, are not Excel wizards and do not know how 
In Excel, for example, sum up to the level of months, from which a long-term comparison 
would succeed. When telling Excel to draw graph 2 
out of a million lines, it takes time. 
- A year's worth of data seems to flow into the user interface around 10 
in a second, which is a perfectly tolerable time when it's big 
it's about the amount of data. In the larger, six-year, 
with the amount of data, you should consider additional data sources where the data 
would be pre-summed instead of the current 15/60 min 
for example day/week level. 
5/3/2022 CSUSE0019792
1
0
3
93
Development conditions
creature
Processing of 311-11 events with the user interface:
Is for 311-11 events handled by the user interface 
it is also possible to add the option to reject/remove for the seller 
event? At the moment, those done incorrectly are retroactive 
the beginnings of the contract must be sent to the previous seller and 
write in the message field a request to reject the transaction
Reject the button for event DH-311-11.
5/11/2022 CSUSE0020407
1
0
3
94
Development conditions
creature
An open disconnection request prevents connection notification
At the point of use XXXXXXXXXXXX there is a shutdown requested by the seller on May 30, 2022. We couldn't do it 
termination at that time and the customer's contract ended on May 31, 2022. A new contract has arrived at the place of use 
from 6.6. We immediately cut it off on 2.6 when there was no valid contract at the place of use, and 
the target was connected today 6.6. when the new customer's contract started. We are not getting a reported connection 
to datahub, because the system slanders that there is an open disconnection request for the target. Neither can we 
I will report to the seller that the disconnection would have been done at their request, because this has not been done. How to get it 
bring the connection reported and the connection status to the place of use correctly. The balance sheets have indeed turned to the new seller 
from 6.6.
Open request of disconnection prevents the notification of connection.
Supplier request disconnection on accounting point XX is 30.5.2022. It wasn't 
possible at that time and the agreement ended on 31.5.2022. The accounting 
point had received a new agreement staring from 6.6.2022. The disconnection 
was made on accounting points 2.6.2022 where there was no valid agreement 
and the accounting point was connected on 6.6.2022 when new agreement 
started. It is not possible to report the connection to the data hub as the system gives 
error message that accounting point has open request for disconnection. It is 
not possible either report to supplier that disconnection has been made from 
the request of them as that is not the case. How to get that connection reported 
and correct status for connection on the accounting point. The balance 
Settlement has changed to the supplier starting from 6 June 2022. 
Event canceled for the space, should not remain open.
6/6/2022 CSUSE0022178
?
?
2
95
Development conditions
creature
Control report for the network company of vendor information/contract status 
for checking
The network company needs a control report to compare whether our and DH's contract information and 
especially up-to-date seller information. Now, in practice, we rely on a reminder of the measurement data, which is visible 
instead of customer data in the measurement data system (The time series was not reported because the sale is not valid with us, 
DH has).
I received a prototype report for this in the general phase, but we haven't found a report from the production side.
Control report for grid company for checking of the supplier information and 
agreement status.
Grid company requests control report that can be used to compare the 
agreement information in own system and datahub up to date and especially 
supplier information. Now the reminder of measurement data is the only way to 
check that is seen in measurement data system instead of customer information 
(time series is not reported because sales is not valid with our local sales 
company but is valid in datahub).
Prototype of that kind of report was available during the dress rehearsal but not 
in the production system anymore.
9/6/2022 CSUSE0022467
1
0
2
96
Development conditions
creature
Business transactions made with Datahub's user interface
Is there a report in Datahub that we could use to report "manually" done in the DH user interface 
business events?
13/06/2022 CSUSE0022666
1
0
3
97
Development conditions
creature
Unnecessary customer data deviations; when will you come to datahub 
the contents of the fields according to the data standard and Titan 
validations?
Examples of different types of data and daily quantity data: 
1. By the way, we and datahub have the same phone number, but datahub's number is without the country code 
(+358501234567/0501234567). According to the data standard, the allowed format of the telephone number is ITU-T E.164 
according to (+358501234567). There are about ten of these useless messages every day. 
2. Customer house letter AS we have as. There are numerous variations of this, these messages come daily approx 
ten pieces.
3. Information written in capital letters: the personal customer's name is otherwise the same, but in the one coming from the data hub 
written entirely in capital letters, e.g. AKU ANKKA in our information, Aku Ankka. It is also in the street name 
addresses written in capital letters. 
4. foreign addresses; In the validation in Tita, the entire address was removed from the street name field 
including zip code and post office information. The street number was set to 0. Now addresses come as they happen. 
 
In the Datahub 1.0 implementation project, Titta validated the supplied data and the parties acted on that basis 
resource-intensive data correction.  On Säti days, in group work, there was a deep concern about datahub information 
from decay and the dilution of the work we do. Some of the parties update everything in their system 
without checking. Some have acquired e.g. robotics for processing useless messages in their system.
The group of Säti days agreed that the validation of the data sent to the data hub should be in the data hub, 
and not so that the validation and rejection of incorrect transactions is done by everyone in the datahub 
receiving party.  The current model causes unnecessary additional work for the parties. 
During the Datahub 1.0 implementation project, the lack of validation was reported, both mentioned and validations 
would come to datahub later. I couldn't find a schedule for this in e.g. the Datahub 2.0 material. When 
validation is implemented in datahub?  
Limitation of unnecessary customer data discrepancies with data validations for 
data fields according to the data standard and Titta data migration.
Examples for different types of data and daily number of information:
1. Phone number is the same in market party system and datahub but in datahub 
without the country code (+358501234567/0501234567). According to the data 
standard phone number's allowed in format is ITU-T E.164 (+358501234567). 
Unnecessary messages because of this daily about ten.
2. Customer house letter "AS" in our system "as". That has several variations 
and causes about ten messages daily.
3. Capital letters written data: end customer name is same in market party 
system and datahub but the one coming from datahub is written with capital 
letters, e.g. DONALD DUCK, in market party system Donald Duck. Also in the 
street names with capital letters.
4. Foreign addresses; Titta's validation for street name field had full address 
without postal number and post office information. Street number got zero (0). 
Now the address updates can give anything.
Datahub 1.0 commissioning project with Titta validated tthey delivered data and 
market parties used a lot of time to make data correct. Now there is a big worry 
that data quality goes down and the big effort done the go-live is lost. The 
market party systems work differently, some systems do not validate anything 
and some systems use e.g. robotics.
15/06/2022 CSUSE0022826
2
0
2
98
Development conditions
creature
CMS Reporting; Open events
From the CMS section Reporting Business Open events. How has this been thought to be utilized when 
the report does not show the network access number? It is of no use to us to know the number. Also 
other reports usually only give the number, we need the place of use or contract number according to order 
we can compare the data with our own system. Is it possible to develop these reports 
more user-friendly?
6/17/2022 CSUSE0023119
1
0
3
99
Development conditions
creature
The content of the e-mail sent to the previous seller 
development
Suggested fix:
The content of the e-mail message (which goes to the previous seller) is misleading if the new (retroactive 
the seller notifying the contract notification) has notified several retroactive contracts to datahub. These 
comes quite a lot and you always have to explain that "don't worry about the content of this e-mail message, 
your contract has really ended"
(E.g. I received a message from you: "Notified sales agreement with effective date 2022-03-30T21:00:00Z 
could not be created for usage location XXXXXXXXXXXX due to validation errors. Your sales contract 
YYYYYYYY continues at the place of use unchanged." However, our contract is not valid 
with the user interface. Is the information incorrect?
Development of the email sent to the previous supplier.
The email content (the one sent to the previous supplier) is misleading if new 
(supplier that notifies the retrospective sales agreement) supplier has notified 
several retrospective agreements to the datahub. There can be many of these 
and always those require additional explanation that "ignore this email content, 
your agreement has been ended in real".
E.g. message: "Notified sales agreement start date DD is accounting point X 
cannot be created because of validation error. Sales contract Y continues 
unchanged on the accounting point. But the sales agreement is not valid on the 
user interface. Incorrect information?
6/22/2022 CSUSE0023507
1
0
1
100
Development conditions
creature
CAP Energy reporting
Could Datahub's Energy Reporting be developed in such a way that Datahub could be viewed at once, e.g. 
History data for two years. Now it seems that you can only view data for a period of 12 months. 
As a customer, it is often interesting to compare, for example, data from the same period of the previous year. E.g. Previous year and 
current year. Or now May 2022 and the previous May 2021. Therefore, e.g. the previous 24 months 
it would be nice to have the expenses listed one after the other. Datahub would be significantly better for this than electricity 
the services of sellers or network companies.
6/26/2022 CSUSE0023734
1
0
3
101
Development conditions
creature
Search for measurement data to show changes
Would it be possible to change the search view of the measurement data immediately on the start screen. It would be important to see the address right away 
in the initial view and not just a long string of numbers.
The search view for measurement data in datahub is clumsy. Only a fraction of the searched series will be displayed 
displayed and examining the measurement data is the same as browsing/scrolling. Could you summarize that view from there? 
from above so that the fields/cells at the top are next to each other or closer together so that down 
there would be more room for those series of hours to be visible. Or can such a change be made that those series of hours 
would open in a completely different window, which would then be the size of the entire screen, that would be the best option. 
In this view, that information at the top takes up a huge part of the view and the subject itself 
the view is minimal. And the computer screen settings do not help with this.
6/27/2022 CSUSE0023785
CSUSE0019887
2
0
3 Usability improvement
102
Development conditions
creature
Datahub user interface - Get measurement data - XLS output 
the randomness of the readings and other nice things
In general, as a party trying to use a 3rd party, I see if there is one that works in this system 
sub-area?
- The user interface often gives an error message if you try to view the measurement data with something else 
with a resolution other than the default PT1H, i.e. h-level. "An error occurred during processing of the submitted 
request."
- XLS outputs work completely randomly.
With H-level readings: the readings on the XLS output must be multiplied by a random hidden factor, cf 
to the readings shown in the user interface. This coefficient is not shown to the user in any location information 
or with a printout, i.e. you have to notice, calculate and process the readings yourself. In the CSV data, the readings are the same 
sizes with the user interface.
E.g. from a couple of different kp
PT1H h level:
Xkatu 5, City
Place of use XXXXXXXXX
Timestamp: 21/06/2022 0.00 
Reading from UI or CSV: 0.06
With XLS output: 0.00416666666666667
P1M per monthso:
Ytie 3, City
Place of use XXXXXXXXXXXX
Attached is a picture of the user interface and XLS output. For these, you can't even use a multiplier, because the part 
The month readings are the same with the user interface and some of the readings are something completely different without anything 
logic. Some of the readings appear to have a comma as a decimal separator and some a period.
6/28/2022 CSUSE0023866
3
3
3
103
Development conditions
creature
of a customer with the party's own ID 
connecting to the y ID
Customer merge should also be possible for customers with y ID (i.e. customer type company 
AB01). There will be a huge number of these tickets and the only way to fix the situation is for the parties to cancel 
their agreement and notify again. Since customer merge (DH-116) is also successful for consumers, it should be 
also succeed for companies.
(E.g. Customer with the Party's own ID XXXXXXXXX_YYYYYYYY Asunto Oy ZZZZZZZZZ 
should be combined with the y-identifier TTTTTTTT.)
Customer merge with VAT number within the market party's own account.
It shall be possible to do custom merge also for end customers with VAT 
number (meaning customer type for company AB01). There comes a lot of 
these ind of tickets and the only way to fix the situation is that market parties 
cancel the contract and notify again. As customer merge is possible for end 
customer, it shall be possible for companies as well.
(E.g. end customer XXX_YYY and house hold company ZZZZ shall be merged 
under market party account to the VAT number TTTTT.).
7/4/2022 CSUSE0024260
1
1
2
104
Development conditions
creature, 
meeting 
2
KBUSE0010529: The effect of the connection notice on the contract 
to the start dates
Could the operation of the hub be changed when connecting under-construction spaces? For example, so that the start date of the contract 
will it only be changed if the building has been under construction for the entire duration of the contract? In this case, old ones 
contracts that have already been invoiced would not be changed? In other words, if the contract has been valid 
before kp was changed to under construction status, changing the status back to connected would not change the contract 
early days. If, on the other hand, the contract has entered into force after the contract has been changed to under construction status, 
the start date of the contract will be changed as it is now. Is the contract notification date the determining factor? 
or the start date of the contract, I don't know which would be better.
Can datahub be changed in "under contraction" states connect? E.g. contract 
start date is changed only if accounting point has been under construction 
before accounting point was changed to under construction state and the state 
change to connected would not change agreement start date. If the agreement 
has become valid after the accounting point has been changed to the under 
construction state, agreement start date can be changed as current rules say. Is 
the ruling factor the agreement notification date or contract start date?
See section 57.
7/6/2022 CSUSE0024435
?
?
1
Related to development proposal #57.
105
Development conditions
creature
Common sense is needed when it comes to software
Hello! With the introduction of the Hub, the companies have started to receive a flood of customer data updates. Some updates 
no information has changed, but they still need to be checked individually. However, we don't have any 
resources to do all the steps manually and that wouldn't be the purpose and that's why we have 
updates of customer information swim through automatically and we check them afterwards as soon as we can. 
Attached is the case of one example customer, so that you understand that you have to somehow get more 
common sense. We currently have an online contract for two with the customer in question 
to the place of use, one of which we also sell electricity to. There is an outsider in the second place of use 
seller. In practice, however, these address updates can come to us through the customer from completely different people 
from sellers or networks, and we can't get to the root cause, i.e. the source of this false information in the hub 
send. In the example case, a mailbox without PL text. Thinking about the future, you need to get a view of the hub, 
that from which companies information flows to other companies. We in the companies cannot start calling the whole of Finland 
electricity companies and find out who doesn't write PL correctly. After Hub's arrival, this is how it is as a manager 
it's really frustrating to watch our customer service people do this kind of thing here, it's really frustrating 
repair work, which has increased significantly since the hub was put into use compared to the previous time. Is it 
are we really trained to a high level for this kind of work? The answer is "it isn't". Gotta get this 
the entire sector to recover from system changes. In companies, we have to really use our time 
to productive work that benefits our company.
The end customer has a valid grid agreement at the moment in two accounts 
points and we have a sales agreement to one of those. The other accounting 
point has another supplier.  
7/11/2022 CSUSE0024674
2 ?
1
106
Development conditions
creature
Could you please add to the connection requests requested by the seller 
tacheck that the connection request cannot be sent unless 
a break request has not been sent from the access point
For example, the connection request for cp XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX has come for an earlier day than the later one now 
break coming. 
You can also see connection requests even though there is no disconnection request at all. For example XXXXXXXXXXXX. 
And there are connection requests from the Seller, e.g. in cases of moving, even though there is no interruption 
even in the event. (The same practice from them also during Prodat). 
The problem is that the events remain open in our data hub because we cannot delete them ourselves. 
Can you add validation check for connect requests by supplier: connect request 
cannot be sent if there has not been sent a disconnect request for the account 
point.
E.g. accounting point XXX disconnect request has arrived on earlier day that 
there is now disconnection planned to happen. There is also a connection available 
requests even there are no disconnect requests. E.g. XXX. And there comes e.g. 
in move cases disconnect requests from supplier even there is no disconnect 
planned to happen at all.
Issues are that events remain open in datahub for us because we cannot remove 
them by ourselves.
7/12/2022 CSUSE0024715
1
0
2
107
Development conditions
creature
Canceled contracts for the network company's place of use 
to historical information
It would be good if the contracts canceled by the seller could somehow be displayed in e.g. the history of the place of use. Between 
repair situations cause extra annoyance and the display of the canceled contract would help in the investigation.
The canceled agreements to the DSO's accounting point history.
It would be good if supplier's canceled agreements could be visible on e.g. 
accounting point history information. The fixing situations cause extra harm and 
the canceled agreements visibility would help in finding out the issues.
7/13/2022 CSUSE0024790
1
0
1
108
Development conditions
creature
Would it be possible to get a view of the place of use? 
review date field active
When you have searched for the information about the place of use and the information about the place of use opens, it would make it easier to use if at the same time 
you could change the review date on the screen and not have to go back to the beginning.
7/13/2022 CSUSE0024791
1
0
3
109
Development conditions
creature
Unnecessary online contract confirmations to go away 
automatically from open transactions when the seller cancels 
his contract
(E.g. Hello. Will you delete the open DH-312-1 transaction kp XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX from 29.3.2022. Seller 
has canceled the start of the contract from the date in question, 30.3.  The seller's sale has started on 30/3/2022. Isn't it 
these unnecessary online contract confirmations are removed from open transactions when the seller cancels 
his contract? If not, it would be good to develop this so that they are automatically removed and not left for nothing 
to hang out at the network operator's open events.)
Unnecessary grid agreement confirmations to be removed automatically from 
open events when the supplier cancels the agreement.
(E.g. can you remove open DH-312-1 event on accounting point XX on day 
29/3/2022. Supplier has canceled sales agreement starting on the 30.3. Sales 
company's delivery has started on 30.3.2022. Isn't there a rule to remove 
unnecessary grid agreement confirmations from open events when supplier 
cancels the agreement? If not, it would be good to have one, so that those will 
be removed automatically and those do not remain unnecessarily in grid 
company's open events.) 
7/25/2022 CSUSE0025402
?
?
2
110
Development conditions
creature
Retroactive termination - information about the termination to the network
Development proposal: the network must be informed of the termination if the seller first cancels the termination and this 
then conclude the contract again for the same day.
(E.g. Kp XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX we received information from datahub that 24.6.2022 00:00 closing date 
would have been cancelled. Now, however, it seems that the sales contract had been concluded by that day. Have a decision 
after the cancellation, a new decision has been made, for which no event has been sent to the network?
Retrospective cancellation - grid shall be informed about that. 
The grid company shall get information about the end of the agreement if the supplier has 
first canceled ending and after that ends agreement again for same day.
(E.g. from accouting point XXX we received information that 24.6.2022 00_00 
ending date is cancelled. Now it seems that sales agreement is signed on that 
day. Has there arrived a new ending after the cancellation of the ending, about what 
has not delivered the event to the grid company?
7/29/2022 CSUSE0025793
2
111
Development conditions
creature
CAP Could the SPOT price be displayed in the system 
per day/hourly
Good service. However, there would be a few wishes.
You should be able to download data from a period of more than a year in one go.
It would be good to have the spot price per hour/day as historical information.
With the help of the spot price, you could create your own consumption profile according to the electricity prices, and you could do that 
reasonable comparisons between exchange contracts and fixed-price contracts.
8/2/2022 CSUSE0025926
2
0
3
112
Development conditions
creature
CAP development proposal datahub
- "Upload file" gives the current day as the default end date. Almost everyone togetherat night there will be approx. 
delayed for the day due to data collection, now there is a useless error message (I assume it's because of that) when 
fetches data. It could be already a couple of days ago as the end date by default.
- It would be extremely convenient if customers could give access to the data for a limited time to anyone in the service 
to the registered. Now, third-party access is quite difficult for small and medium-sized companies 
and third parties do not always need continuous authorization.
3/8/2022 CSUSE0026019
2
0
3
113
Development conditions
creature
Contract information / third party / party authorization
The service provider (XXXX & YYYY) cannot see the seller's contract information, even for the customer's electricity purchase 
as the corresponding service provider, we have full power of attorney for the customer's contract information. This leads to that 
that we still have to inquire via e-mail about the basic level of the current contract from the sellers, 
such as term and termination conditions. 
Contract information should also be released to third parties. Alternatively, Datahub 
"party authorization" - the function should be developed so that the seller can authorize a third party 
to contract information. 
Service provider cannot see supplier's agreement data, even as end customer's 
electricity purchase responsibility service provider we should have full access to 
agreement data. This causes cases where we need to request basic agreement 
data from supplier by email, as if agreement is fixed term and cancellation rules.
Agreement information shall also be released to third parties. Another 
alternative is that datahub's market party authorization shall be developed so 
that supplier can give authorization to third parties for the agreements' data.
9/8/2022 CSUSE0026373
?
?
2
Related to displaying contract information 
strongly that the agreement is always 
a matter between two parties, 
customer and seller or 
of the distribution system operator. This is why it is 
in due course when defining processes 
omitted from authorized information 
those contract details. If we start this 
to change, is also 
end customers should be informed that 
with authorization, the service provider can access 
stick to this information. 
It is bad in party authorization 
party that it authorizes the party 
entirely to a particular process and 
to certain information. It cannot be distinguished 
e.g. customer specific that what 
customers this party authorization 
concerns. I could see that there should be an addition 
a mechanism to further ensure that, 
that the customer is also separate 
authorized this information by others 
in addition to their information.
But this will be taken into consideration and 
let's see if we can find something here 
a solution that meets your information needs 
regarding intake could be implemented.
114
Development conditions
creature
A termination event to be processed by the network
The network cannot process the termination event because the contract has ended as a result of a new move. 
If the new move announced to the place of use is cancelled, this agreement would be erroneously reinstated, 
even though it has been notified of an end event separately. It would be good to take this into account in development.
(E.g. We ask to remove the open transaction from the place of use XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 
regarding the termination of the online contract YYYYYYYY for the date 2022-08-30 00, thank you. The network cannot 
processed termination event, because the contract has ended as a result of a new move. Will you return? 
the contract possibly erroneously come into effect if that new move happens to be cancelled?
Grid needs to be able to handle ending event
Grid cannot handle ending event because the agreement is ended because of 
new move-in. In case there is a new move-in notified into the accounting point, 
then the agreement would be revert incorrectly valid even there has been made 
notification with ending event to the accounting point separately.
E.g. We request to remove accounting point XXX's open transaction from the 
grid agreement YYY about ending for time 30.8.2022. Grid cannot handle 
ending event because is has ended because of new move-in. Shall the 
agreement revert valid if new move-in is cancelled?
8/11/2022 CSUSE0026496
?
?
2
115
Development conditions
creature
Development proposal: enable fuse size 10xZZZ
We have requested fuse size 10x3x100 and 10x3x1250 for the customer information system from the system supplier. 
It is not possible to add these, because Datahub only accepts one number for that fuse 
e.g. 9xZZZ. The powers of the connections are increasing and it would be necessary to have this fuse. Can we 
also allows fuses starting with 10xZZZ in Datahub?
Possibility to have fuse size 10xZZZZ
It is not possible to add new fuse sizes (10x3x100 and 10x3x1250) into the 
customer information system as datahub accepts only the fuse size with one 
number in the name e.g. 9xZZZ. The power of accounting point connections 
increase and the new fuse sizes are necessary. Can datahub accept fuse sizes 
starting with "10xZZZ"? 
8/11/2022 CSUSE0026532
1
1
1
116
Development conditions
creature
Check with Datahub about the correctness of the surname/name information
I would like to discuss this matter with the development groupmás, because I myself don't have anything to give directly 
an answer to what kind of check should be done on the datahub. We now accept weekly 
data protection notices that the customer's name information has changed incorrectly since it came from the data hub 
with the update. Settling these cases is very laborious and annoying for the customer. 
In the background, these have either a Dh111-2 made with incorrect information (the customer's name and address do not match) or a new 
entering into a contract with the wrong name/hetu combination.  I would also hope that we would take the development team 
under the discussion, what kind of checks could be added to the end of the data hub to prevent customer data 
of recklessly becoming false. At this time, datahub has no reviews at all, and when a party does 
makes a mistake is suddenly multi-agent invoicing messed up.
Datahub to validate personal id/name information match.
We are receiving Weekly data privacy Notifications that customer name 
informations have been changed incorrectly because of updates from datahub. 
The root cause is incorrect DH -112 (end customer personal id and name do 
not match) or new agreement has been made with incorrect name/personal id 
combination. 
15/08/2022 CSUSE0026678
?
?
1
117
Development conditions
creature
Possibility to update new SAG without EC.AGR. 215  
(reason for agreement start interpreted incorrectly)
There needs to be cured the problem with 
-interpreting the reason for agreement starts on the accounting point and 
-possibility for the same DDQ to update new SAG without EC.AGR. 215 (reason for agreement start 
interpreted incorrectly?)
There is a valid grid agreement for the customer whose new sales agreement is being rejected (because 
DSO has not canceled the grid agreement just yet) but the valid sales agreement on the ACP is for 
completely different customer. 
Submitting a new agreement fails incorrectly because of validation rule EC.AGR.215 (reason for 
agreement start interpreted incorrectly?)
Tested in SAT01, version 1.9.0. Found this problem when re-testing PTASK0010150. 
The test case simulates a situation where the customer wants to postpone the start date of the agreement. 
In these situations it's quite common that the supplier cancels the original agreement and submits a new one 
agreement for the same customer with different start date before DSO reacts to the cancellation 
1. I created a new accounting point XXXXXXXXXXXX and submitted a fixed term agreement for customer 
YYYYYYYY starting from 3.7. The grid agreement was also confirmed. 
2. Then I submitted a new agreement for different supplier and different customer (customer 
YYYYYYYY) starting from 1.8. Agreement was accepted because it is a move in and corresponding grid 
agreement was also confirmed. 
3. I canceled the later sales agreement (customer YYYYYYYYC's agreement) with cancellation reason 
AR02. Corresponding grid agreement was not canceled before the next step. 
4. I tried to submit a new sales agreement for the same customer (customer YYYYYYYYC) starting from 
1.9.  Agreement is rejected because of the validation rule EC.AGR.215 (If an Accounting Point has a valid 
fixed-term Sales Agreement (on Start of Occurrence) where the customer type is "Consumer" and the 
latest fixed term period is less than or equal to 2 years, then a Change of Supplier cannot be reported). 
Rejection makes no sense because the agreement that is rejected has a completely different customer than 
on the agreement on step 1. See attachment "Agreement rejection" for error code received when testing 
and attachment "sales agreement" for current sales agreement's information. 
5/7/2022 INCUSE0000061289
?
?
2
118
Development conditions
creature
Is it possible to see the usage locations from Datahub's reports 
by seller
Is it possible to get the locations of use for a specific seller from the new sales contracts report?
Is there a datahub report that shows accounting points by supplier?
Is it possible to get all accounting points listed for a supplier in the new sales 
agreements report.
1
0
2
119
Development conditions
creature
Invalid hetu and DH-340 process
This subject has been thought about quite a lot recently when data protection observation tickets have been discussed..
One of the parties received just such a comment "Thank you for the message. I would like to make sure that when we send 
DH311-1 message, and with it, customer information is updated behind the incorrect personal identification number. Is that enough? 
cancellation of our sale (Reason code Seller canceled) to cancel erroneously updated from all parties 
information if the incorrect ID is someone else's ID?"
That is, at that point, is the cancellation made by the party himself sufficient for the contract with which the invalidity has occurred 
there is? Or do we have to start checking with each party separately that you now have the right ones 
customer information in your own system? What happens to those customer data in the hub if the contract party 
is canceled by the agency, does the incorrect customer data still remain valid, i.e. a party would still keep it 
fixwith an update?
Comment on the topic:
I read through that DH-340 design and there is no mention of the contract 
customer information updated through creation is as if canceled. That is, it remains in effect what is wrong 
notified if that customer has been in the hub at the time of notification and this DH-311 has updated that information. Good 
attention, you should think of a model and instructions on how to do that. The seller of the canceled contract 
you don't necessarily know how the information was in the hub before the contract was announced. But it can't be like that either 
that we would go find out about them. Those cancellations go automatically.
Incorrect personal id and DH-340 process
DH-311-1 message updates the customer information with incorrect personnel 
id.
Is it enough that our sales canceling (reason code supplier cancelled) cancels 
incorrect updated information from all parties if the incorrect personal id is some 
other person's personal id?
If the seller cancels the announced contract at the wrong time, it should be removed 
resulting customer information.
2
1
1
120
121
122
123
124
125
126